ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?
IT’S TIME FOR ACTION
CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 2005

THE BRITISH DREAM
I BELIEVE that Britain could be doing so much better.

We will devolve power from the centre to our communities – a
Conservative Government will trust professionals and enable parents

Our country has everything going for it. Creative flair, world-beating

and patients to shape services according to their needs.

companies, globally-respected universities, a tradition of tolerance, a
love of freedom, a talent for enterprise, a concern for the underdog

We will secure the foundations of a successful and decent society –

and the ability to pull together in a crisis.

a Conservative Government will tilt the balance of the justice system
in favour of the victim, and will restore control of our borders. We will

Britain is a great country. But today it is heading in the wrong

settle our relationship with the European Union by bringing powers

direction. Far too many people are held back from achieving their full

back from Brussels to Britain.

potential. A thousand everyday frustrations prevent the British people
from living fulfilled lives.

The British people should feel confident that they can get on with
their lives while their Government concentrates on tackling the

Conservatives know that governments don’t have all the answers. But

practical problems which matter to them. That is why a Conservative

if they govern with the right values, they can make a real difference.

Government will be focused on cleaner hospitals, school discipline,

Today, Britain is being governed with the wrong values.

more police, controlled immigration and lower taxes.

Instead of rewarding families who do the right thing, work hard and

I’m in politics to give something back to the country which gave so

pay their taxes, Mr Blair’s Government takes them for granted. And

much to me. As the child of immigrants, as a state school pupil, as

after eight years in power, all he offers is more talk.

the first person in my family to go to university, I am driven by a
profound sense of pride in Britain.

Meanwhile, people worry about infections they might catch in
hospitals which are dirty when they should be clean. Parents worry

For me the heart of politics is all about people – their hopes and

about their children not learning to read and write properly in

aspirations. People want the freedom, security and opportunity to get

classrooms which are unruly, not disciplined. In too many

on in life.

communities it is responsible citizens, not criminals and yobs, who
walk in fear. Our out-of-control immigration system encourages

They want the freedom to take the important decisions about their

people smugglers and penalises genuine refugees. And all this has

families and to keep more of the money they earn. They want the

happened despite huge, stealthy increases in taxation.

security that goes with owning your home, saving for your retirement,
living in a safe neighbourhood. They want the opportunity provided

So long as this continues, the people of this country are deprived of

by a good education and a thriving economy.

the chance to be all they can be. They shouldn’t have to settle for this.
And they expect fair play. I believe that to be treated equally is a
At this election there is a chance for us to be optimistic about our

birthright, and that discrimination is wrong. A Conservative

future again. People have been let down by a Government that has

Government will govern in the interests of everyone in our society –

lost touch with them. On May 5th they can elect a Government that

black or white, young or old, straight or gay, rural or urban, rich or poor.

focuses on the things that matter. A Government that acts - and
delivers results. A Government that does exactly what it says.

People are tired of politicians who talk and talk, but fail to deliver.
They’re tired of politicians saying one thing before an election and

We will be ambitious for our country – a Conservative Government will

doing something else afterwards. So the next Conservative

aspire to give everyone the chance to make the most of their lives. We

Government will not only make a difference: it will be different.

will govern on behalf of the forgotten majority and their values, the

Accountability will be our watchword. This manifesto sets out clearly

people who make up the backbone of our country: people who work

our priorities for what we will do, how we will pay for it, and the values

hard; save to buy their first home; take responsibility for their families.

by which we will govern.

People who do the right thing should be rewarded, not punished.
People have had enough talk. It’s time for action.
We will extend choice – a Conservative Government will give
individuals more control over their own money and over the public
services we all depend on.

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 1

Value for Money and Lower Taxes
A strong economy is the foundation for everything we do. It provides

public spending programmes, we will achieve three simple aims.

higher living standards so that people can look to the future with
optimism. It creates the jobs we all depend on – enabling families to

First, we will give taxpayers value for money. We will spend the same

build their financial independence. It should guarantee our pensions

as Labour would on the NHS, schools, transport and international

in old age. It provides a safety net for the least fortunate. It is essential

development, and more than Labour on police, defence and

in tackling poverty, including child poverty. It pays for our public

pensions. But we will save £12 billion a year by 2007-8 by cutting back

services – our children’s education and our parents’ healthcare. And

other expenditure. We will freeze civil service recruitment, remove

it allows us to invest in our nation’s security – defence, the police and

235,000 bureaucratic posts, and cut or abolish 168 public bodies.

border controls.
Over the period to 2011-12, we will increase government spending
Our economic success over generations has been built on the hard

by 4 per cent a year, compared to Labour’s plans (on current trends)

work, enterprise and creativity of the British people.

to increase spending by 5 per cent a year.

Today, government is spending too much, wasting too much and taxing

Second, we will avoid further Labour stealth taxes by reducing

too much. Britain cannot continue indefinitely to spend more than she

government borrowing. Of our £12 billion savings, we will use £8

is earning without higher taxes or higher interest rates – either of which

billion to reduce Labour’s excessive borrowing, so that we can avoid

will harm our economic prospects. If we are to secure our future

the tax rises that would otherwise be needed.

prosperity, government must once again start to live within its means.
Third, we will lower taxes. We believe that people should choose how
The consequences of Labour’s profligacy are now plain to see. Last

their money is spent. They should be rewarded for their hard work

year, average living standards fell for the first time in over a decade –

and be given peace of mind in old age. We will use the remaining £4

and the poorest 10 per cent of Britons became poorer.

billion of our £12 billion savings to cut taxes in our first Budget.

We need to change direction.

Lower taxes promote enterprise and growth. But they also promote
the right values. Hard-working families have suffered from Labour’s

The way in which a government allocates taxpayers’ money

tax raids on mortgages and marriage, pensions and petrol, buying a

demonstrates its values. By going to war on waste and ending ineffective

home and having a job.

“

People who work hard, pay their taxes and do the right
thing should be rewarded, not punished

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 3

We will change direction. Whereas Labour want to make people more
dependent on the State, we believe that lower taxes help families
build their financial independence and security. For those on low
incomes we will retain the minimum wage, together with proposed
increases.

After a lifetime of paying taxes, we believe people deserve dignity in
retirement. Rising council tax bills, which are up by 76 per cent since
Labour came to power, have hit pensioners particularly hard. That is
why our tax plans include halving council tax bills for millions of
pensioners. Our new, permanent discount, reducing council tax bills
by up to £500 for households where all residents are over 65 will be

schemes to their staff, encouraging employers to make pension

fully funded by central government.

schemes ‘opt-out’ rather than ‘opt-in’. We will also use the unclaimed
assets of banks and other financial institutions to replenish the

A Conservative Government will increase the basic state pension in

pension funds of people who lose out when a scheme fails.

line with earnings rather than prices, reversing the spread of meanstesting. Over four years, this will increase the value of the pension by

The best guarantee of future prosperity is a dynamic economy. The

around £7 a week for single pensioners and £11 a week for couples

growth of China, India and other Asian economies poses a direct

– on top of increases in line with inflation. We will also keep all the

challenge to our future competitiveness. New technology and the

other benefits that pensioners currently receive, including the Winter

speed of global capital flows punish the inflexible and the sluggish.

Fuel Payment, free television licences for the over-75s, and this year’s

We need to reward risk-taking and innovation so that Britain becomes

one-off £200 council tax payment.

the best place in the world to start and grow a business.

The financial security of pensioners tomorrow will be vastly improved

As well as keeping taxes low, we must reduce the burdens on

by encouraging more saving today. To get more people into the

business through deregulation.

saving habit, we will create a new Lifetime Savings Account in which
government contributions top up the money that people save

A Conservative Government will negotiate to restore our opt-out from

themselves. And we will take a series of steps to strengthen company

the European Social Chapter and liberate small businesses from job-

pensions. We will abolish the rules that stop firms promoting pension

destroying employment legislation.

4 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

We will set regulatory budgets for each department, capping and then

Lower Taxes

cutting the cost of the regulations that they can introduce in any one

• Value for money

year. All new regulation will have to have benefits exceeding costs, and

• A lower tax economy

regulations will be given ‘Sunset Reviews’ to check that this remains the

• Support for saving, dignity for pensioners

case. A Conservative Government will end the elaboration or ‘gold-

• Less regulation

plating’ of EU directives.

• A stable economy with low interest rates

A Conservative Government will lock in economic stability. We will
maintain the independence of the Bank of England in setting interest
rates. We will not join the Euro. By keeping the pound as our currency,
control of our interest rates will continue to be set to meet the needs
of the British economy. As the other major parties are committed to
joining the euro, only the Conservatives can make this pledge.

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 5

Flexible Childcare and School Discipline
It’s not easy bringing up a family in modern Britain. Parents who

form-filling and enable families to choose between formal and

work hard to give their children the best start in life need a

informal childcare.

government that is on their side. That means access to flexible
childcare and schools with good discipline and high standards.

We will also give extra support for workplace nurseries and
provide a new network of clubs for older children.

Juggling work and family life can be a struggle. Under Labour,
Britain has the most expensive childcare in Europe, and many

Education enriches lives and provides us all, whatever our

working families receive no help.

background, with the tools to achieve our ambitions.

Conservatives trust families to make the right decisions about

Providing good education costs money – and our plans provide for

childcare. We will reform the system to increase choice, flexibility

an extra £15 billion a year for schools by 2009-10. Even more

and support for working families.

important than extra money, we must get the fundamentals right.

We will provide more flexible maternity pay – giving mothers a

Classrooms need to be disciplined environments where children

choice of whether to receive it over nine months, or a higher

can learn. Teachers must be free to follow their vocation and

amount paid over six months.

inspire young minds. Standards must be maintained so that pupils,
colleges and employers have examinations they can trust. Our

During the next Parliament, we will ensure that all working families

education system should encourage excellence and ambition.

who qualify for the working tax credit will receive up to £50 a week
for each child under the age of five, irrespective of the type of

Today, these basics have been completely neglected. Over one

childcare they choose. We will end Labour’s insistence on endless

million children play truant each year. Head teachers have been

“

Teachers can only teach and children can only learn in
a school with good discipline

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 7

denied the final say on expulsions, and good schools will be further
punished by being forced to admit a quota of disruptive pupils.

Last year a third of children left primary school unable to write
properly and more than 40,000 teenagers left school without a
single GCSE. Examinations have been devalued so that it is
possible to secure a ‘C’ Grade at GCSE maths with just 16 per cent.

A Conservative Government will put the right values at the heart of
our education system. We will ensure proper discipline in schools
by giving heads and governors full control over admissions and
expulsions. We will not allow a minority to ruin the education of the
majority. Instead of disrupting the education of others, difficult
pupils will be given the chance to get their lives back on track in
special Turnaround Schools.

The respect due to teachers will be enhanced by protecting them
against malicious allegations of abuse and, most importantly,
reducing the massive burden of paperwork.

Schools will be liberated to set their own priorities and budgets.
The current proliferation of funding streams will be replaced by a
simple system, with funds allocated on the basis of pupil numbers.
Money will follow the pupil. Head teachers will then have the
freedom to spend money in accordance with their school’s own
needs, without interference from Whitehall.

The examination system will be made more transparent and
accountable. The targets which encourage examiners to award
higher and higher grades for the same level of performance will be
scrapped. Marks will be published alongside grades. And schools
will be free to offer internationally-recognised qualifications
alongside GCSEs and A-Level. We will slim down and improve the
National Curriculum, root out political correctness, restore rigour and
give teachers the scope once again to be creative and imaginative.

8 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

Many children leave school at 16 because they are bored and

will ensure that in our first five years 100,000 more parents get their

because vocational education does not have the status that it

first choice of school.

deserves. We will end the snobbery that has damaged vocational
education. New grants will be made available to help pupils who

Schools will have responsibility for admissions, good schools will

wish to combine GCSEs with vocational study at a wide range of

be allowed to grow and support will be given to new schools set

colleges, businesses and other enterprises. We will introduce

up to respond to parental demand. Parents will also be able to

300,000 vocational grants of £1,000 each for 14-16 year olds.

send their children free of charge to any independent school that
offers a place at no more than the cost of a state-funded school.

Education should be about more than academic learning. Under
Labour, sport has been squeezed out of the curriculum and child

We will pay particular attention to children with special needs.

obesity has risen alarmingly.

Under Labour, the dogmatic pursuit of inclusion has led to the
closure of special schools and children have suffered as a result. A

Our schools should be places where children also learn other

Conservative Government will introduce a moratorium on the

skills for life, such as healthy living, being part of a team and

closure of special schools and give parents proper information and

respecting others. We will give every child the right to two hours of

choice so they can secure the best opportunities for their children.

after-school sport with our Club2School programme, at no cost to
parents. We support improvements to school dinners, and will go

Labour have ignored the further education sector. We will simplify

further by banning junk food in schools.

funding, replace the bureaucratic Learning and Skills Councils,
ensure that money follows the student and allow colleges to apply

Children need to be taught how to deal with risks in life. We will

for “Super college” status with greater freedom to manage

encourage learning outside the classroom and provide protection

budgets, specialise and innovate.

for teachers worried about school trips.
We will restore real choice in higher education by scrapping fees
Parents know their children best and are increasingly frustrated at

and abolishing Labour’s admissions regulator. University funding

not being able to exercise more choice and control over their

will depend on attracting new students and so excellence will be

children’s education. We will give parents the right to choose the

encouraged. We will also help universities move towards greater

school best suited to their child’s needs, and our school expansion

financial

fund will provide an additional 600,000 places in our first term. This

endowments.

independence

by

building

up

their

individual

School Discipline
• Discipline in class
• Rigorous standards
• Choice for parents
• Investing more in local schools
• No university fees

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 9

Hospitals

Better Healthcare and Cleaner Hospitals
We believe that everyone has the right to high quality healthcare,

We will increase the NHS budget by £34 billion a year during our

free at the point of use, delivered when and where they need it.

first Parliament – at least as much as Labour – from £1,450 per
head to £2,000 per head. And we will ensure that the money

Record amounts of taxpayers’ money have been spent on the

reaches the front line.

NHS. Yet over a million people are still waiting for treatment, and
average waiting times have gone up. More people die each year

We will radically reduce the number of Primary Care Trusts,

from infections they pick up in hospitals than on Britain’s roads.

abolish the Strategic Health Authorities and cut the number of
quangos, inspectorates and commissions.

Taxpayers have not received value for money because the NHS
has not been reformed. It is too impersonal, too inflexible, too

Centrally set targets on hospitals will be abolished. Patients will be

centralised and too bureaucratic to respond to the needs of

treated according to clinical needs, not government targets.

patients.

Staff in the health service – from doctors and nurses to porters
and cleaners – work hard to deliver world class healthcare. But the
system lets them down.

We have a clear plan of action to cut waiting times and clean up
hospitals. We will increase funding, reduce bureaucracy,
empower local professionals to operate local services and give
greater choice to patients.

“

The NHS has been too centralised.
We should trust local professionals –
doctors and nurses

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 11

based on the cost of half the NHS operation when people make
these choices both recognises the tax they have paid towards the
NHS and will help further reduce waiting lists.

Choice gives people power, a sense of purpose and control. It
makes those who offer a service accountable to those who use it.
It will give patients the clean hospitals and the shorter waiting
times they want. Our policies will give everyone the kind of choice
in healthcare that today only money can buy.

We believe that increased choice, combined with extra resources
and freedom for local professionals, will end waiting lists as we
We will give power and responsibility to local professionals. All

know them during the life of the next Parliament.

hospitals will have the freedom to hire staff, specialise and borrow
to invest. In response to local demand, hospitals will have the

As we live longer and expect more treatment and care to be

flexibility to increase the number of individual rooms and invest in

available at home and in the community, social services will

infection control teams. We will bring back matron, who will have

inevitably face greater demands. We will give people more control

the power to close wards for cleaning.

over their social care and introduce a partnership scheme so that
no one is compelled to sell their home to pay for long-term care.

We will give patients and local GPs the right to choose the hospital
or care provider that is right for them.

Carers who look after elderly or disabled relatives, including those
suffering from long-term conditions, deserve more support. We will

Funding will follow the patient and go directly to front-line care.

boost respite for carers and give them more choice and

Hospitals will be paid according to the treatments they deliver, rather

information about the support available.

than by Whitehall budgets. Small community hospitals which have the
support of local patients and GPs will not be closed by bureaucrats.

We will ensure greater access to NHS dentistry by changing the
way in which dentists are paid and offering patients a low monthly

Each year around 220,000 people without health insurance pay for
important operations. We believe that providing a contribution

12 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

payment system to cover against large and unplanned bills.

We will introduce health checks for immigrants in order to curb
the spread of diseases such as TB and to protect access to our
NHS. It is, after all, a national health service not a world health
service. People coming to Britain for over 12 months from outside
the EU will be required to undergo a full medical test. And
anyone settling permanently here from outside the EU will have to
demonstrate that they have an acceptable standard of health
and that they are unlikely to impose significant costs or demands
on Britain’s health system.

Public health is important – it affects every family in our country.
That is why a Conservative Government will take action to tackle
sexually transmitted infections (STIs). In Britain today we face an
STI epidemic. Today’s sexually transmitted infections are
tomorrow’s NHS bills. It’s time for a clear, bold and very public
health TV campaign – young people need to know the risks
involved and the precautions they can take.

Cleaner hospitals
• More investment in local hospitals
• Shorter waiting times and cleaner wards
• Health professionals freed from Whitehall interference
• More choice for patients
• Support for family doctors

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 13

Safer Communities and More Police
Ensuring order is the first priority of government. Crime blights

It doesn’t have to be that way. Crime can be cut. Anti-social

lives and ruins communities: it should not be excused, but

behaviour can be confronted. Communities can and should be

condemned and punished. That means drawing a clear distinction

made safe for the law-abiding. It requires active community

between right and wrong, and restoring respect, discipline and

policing and a relentless focus on catching, convicting and

decent values.

punishing criminals.

Crime today is out of control. There is a gun crime every hour. A

Labour’s centralised control of the police has sapped officers’

million violent crimes are committed each year. Fewer than one in

morale, increased bureaucracy and undermined public confidence.

four crimes are now cleared up.
It is time to change direction. We will recruit 5,000 new police
Criminals have a better chance of getting away with breaking the

officers each year, radically cut paperwork and introduce genuine

law today than at any time in the last 25 years.

local accountability, through elected police commissioners.

Anti-social behaviour – vandalism, graffiti, binge-drinking,

Giving local people a say over police priorities will lead to genuine

threatening behaviour – is a growing concern in all our

neighbourhood policing with officers based in the locality clearly

communities.

focused on zero tolerance.

Too many of Mr Blair’s responses have been gimmicks, some of

When criminals are caught they should be punished properly. If

which, like marching yobs to cash machines, were never even

appropriate they should be sent to prison, and in any event encouraged

introduced.

to reform their ways. None of these things happens properly today.

“

Our society needs more respect, discipline
and decent values. Crime is wrong and should be
punished, not excused

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 15

So, we will end Labour’s early release from prison scheme and

rehab places (compared with fewer than 2,500 places today), and

provide 20,000 extra prison places.

by giving all young users of hard drugs a straight choice –
effective treatment or appearing in court. We will stop sending

We will introduce honesty in sentencing so that criminals serve the

mixed messages on drugs by reversing Labour’s reclassification of

full sentence handed down by the court. They will be told, in open

cannabis as a less serious drug, changing it from class ‘C’ back to

court, the minimum time that they will serve behind bars.

class ‘B’.

There is much that can be done to improve the justice system – the

We will support the social institutions – families, schools, voluntary

police, courts and the prison and probation services. But they only

bodies and youth clubs – that can prevent crime and drug

pick up the pieces of problems whose roots often lie elsewhere.

dependency before it starts.

Our goal is to reverse the drift towards communities that are

A Conservative Government will place the highest possible priority

blighted by crime, where people live in fear. We will deliver safer

on combating the threat from terrorism. This requires a co-

neighbourhoods where the streets belong to the law-abiding.

ordinated response right across government, including funding for
the intelligence services, training for the emergency services,

We will start at school by ensuring proper discipline.

robust anti-terror laws, controlled immigration and rigorous
arrangements for the extradition and deportation of terrorist

We will break the link between drugs and crime by massively

suspects. That’s why we will appoint a Homeland Security Minister

expanding treatment programmes, including 25,000 residential

to co-ordinate our national response.

16 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

More Police
• 5,000 extra police a year
• Less paperwork and political correctness
• More rehab places for addicts
• Tougher sentences for career criminals
• Prisoners to serve their sentences in full

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 17

Secure Borders and Controlled Immigration
Britain has benefited from immigration. We all gain from the social
diversity, economic vibrancy and cultural richness that immigration
brings.

“

We welcome people who
want to work hard and make
a positive contribution

”

But if those benefits are to continue to flow we need to ensure that

On asylum, a Conservative Government will not allow outdated and

immigration is effectively managed, in the interests of all Britons,

inflexible rules to prevent us shaping a system which is more

old and new.

humane, more likely to improve community relations and better
managed. So we will take back powers from Brussels to ensure

This Government has lost effective control of our borders. More

national control of asylum policy, withdraw from the 1951 Geneva

than 150,000 people (net) come to Britain every year, a population

Convention, and work for modernised international agreements on

the size of Peterborough. Labour see “no obvious upper limit to

migration.

legal immigration”.
Our objective is a system where we take a fixed number of
Our asylum system is in chaos. Instead of offering a safe haven to

refugees from the UNHCR rather than simply accepting those who

those most in need, the current system encourages illegality.

are smuggled to our shores. Asylum seekers’ applications will be

Desperate individuals are forced into the hands of people

processed outside Britain.

smugglers and when they reach Britain they are open to
continuing exploitation in the underground economy. Only two out

We will set an overall annual limit on the numbers coming to Britain,

of every ten asylum seekers are found to have a genuine claim.

including a fixed quota for the number of asylum seekers we
accept. Parliament will set, and review, that number every year.

Britain has reached a turning-point. That is why a Conservative
Government will bring immigration back under control. We have set

We are committed to making a continued success of Britain’s

out a series of practical and considered steps to restore control

diversity. There should be popular consent for further

and fairness to our immigration system.

demographic change. And the best way to secure continuing
support for future migration is by showing that government has

First of all we will take proper control of our borders. We will

control of our borders. Refusing to set a limit on new migrants is

ensure 24-hour surveillance at our ports, and restore full

irresponsible politics. Only the Conservatives take this issue

embarkation controls. Border security is currently divided between

seriously enough to insist on a limit, and will introduce the policies

seven different bodies reporting to three different cabinet

necessary to police it.

ministers. We believe that the time has now come to establish a
British Border Control Police, whose sole job will be to secure
Britain’s borders.

Controlled Immigration
• Australian-style points system for work permits

We will introduce a points-based system for work permits similar to

• Parliament to set annual immigration limit

the one used in Australia. This will give priority to people with the

• UK to take fair share of refugees

skills Britain needs.

• 24-hour security at ports
• British Border Control Police

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 19

Why can’t
politicians
be more
accountable?

Accountability
In the real world, if you say you’re going to do something, you do

covering planning, housing, transport and the fire service will all

it. And if you fail, you can lose your job. That is accountability.

be returned to local authorities.

Accountability is at the heart of good government and a healthy
democracy. We all know that when people think they can get away

The House of Commons needs to be made more capable of

with it, they won’t do things as well as they should.

standing up to the executive. We will strengthen select
committees and make time for proper scrutiny of all legislation.

That’s why we’ve published a Timetable for Action that sets out

As par t of our drive for efficiency across Whitehall and

clearly what we will do, and when we will do it. And Michael Howard

Westminster, we will cut the number of MPs by 20 per cent. We

has made clear that ministers who fail to deliver will lose their jobs.

will seek cross-party consensus for a substantially elected House
of Lords.

Under Mr Blair, the way we are governed has become less
accountable, more complex and, ultimately, less democratic.

Conservatives believe that the Union of England, Scotland, Wales and

Ministers don’t take responsibility for their failures. Unprecedented

Northern Ireland brings benefits to all parts of our United Kingdom.

powers have been given to new, unelected and remote bodies,
including regional assemblies for which there is no popular

We remain strongly committed to making a success of devolution

support. The House of Commons has been steadily undermined,

in Scotland, so that it delivers for the Scottish people. In Wales we

and proper reform of the House of Lords has been repeatedly

will work with the Assembly and give the Welsh people a

promised but never delivered.

referendum on whether to keep the Assembly in its current form,
increase its powers or abolish it.

Conservatives understand that people identify with their town, city
or county, not with arbitrary “regions”. We will abolish Labour’s

But devolution has brought problems of accountability at

regional assemblies. Powers currently exercised at a regional level

Westminster.

“

We believe in giving more power to individuals,
families and communities

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 21

Now that exclusively Scottish matters are decided by the Scottish

With greater power for local people will come less interference

Parliament in Edinburgh, exclusively English matters should be

from central government. We will radically cut the burdens on local

decided in Westminster without the votes of MPs sitting for Scottish

councils.

constituencies who are not accountable to English voters. We will
act to ensure that English laws are decided by English votes.

A Conservative Government will support creativity and excellence
in the arts. Instead of Labour’s centralised bureaucracy and

We are committed to supporting Northern Ireland’s position within

political interference, including in the National Lottery, we will

the United Kingdom in accordance with the consent principle. We

devolve funding and decision-making while ensuring that the

will continue to work for a comprehensive political settlement,

lottery supports the arts, heritage, sport and charities.

based on the principles of the Belfast Agreement. We will not
accept any party into the government of Northern Ireland linked to

The most powerful form of devolution is to individuals and families.

a paramilitary organisation that holds on to illegal weapons and is

The Right to Buy for council tenants extended home ownership,

engaged in any criminal activity. In the absence of devolved

transformed many of Britain’s housing estates and expanded our

government, we will make direct rule more accountable.

property-owning democracy.

Communities, Transport and the Environment

A Conservative Government will extend this right to tenants of

Britain draws great strength from its diversity. We are a country of

housing associations. Our plans to boost shared ownership

vibrant urban centres, historic towns and an evolving countryside.

schemes, and give social housing tenants the right to own a share

It is both inefficient and insensitive to local communities to impose

of their home, will also benefit first-time buyers.

uniform control from Whitehall.
Empowering individuals also means giving them the opportunity to
We believe in devolving power down to the lowest level so that

get around Britain more quickly and safely. A modern economy

local people are given greater control over their own lives.

depends on it.

Local councils should be accountable to voters. But under Labour,

A Conservative Government will end Labour’s war on the motorist.

people’s priorities have taken second place to centrally imposed

We will modernise Britain’s road network and review all speed

targets and Whitehall inspection regimes. The cost to local

cameras to ensure they are there to save lives, not make money.

taxpayers has increased rapidly, with council tax levels up 76 per
cent since 1997. It has been a vicious circle – less representation

We will bring stability to the rail network, avoiding further costly

and more taxation.

and inefficient re-organisation. Successful train operating
companies will have their franchises extended to allow companies

The Conservatives will liberate local government.

to invest in improved stations, car parks, facilities and rolling stock.

Local communities will have a greater say over planning decisions.

A commitment to safeguarding our environment lies deep in

We will also give new powers to help local councils to deal with

Conservative thinking. We instinctively understand the importance of

those incidents, such as illegal traveller encampments, which

conservation, natural beauty and our duty of stewardship of the earth.

breach planning laws. Together with clear guidance for police and
our review of the Human Rights Act, this will ensure fairness for all,

A Conservative Government will call a halt to Labour’s plans to

rather than special rules for different groups.

concrete over our green fields. We will promote development on

22 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

brownfield sites and establish more Green Belts with tighter

We value the diverse nature of our nation and believe in defending

development rules.

traditional liberties. A Conservative Government will therefore
introduce a Bill, and offer Parliament a free vote, to overturn the

To ensure Britain plays its part in combating climate change, we

Government’s ban on hunting with dogs.

will phase out the use of harmful HFCs and deliver greater
incentives to make homes more energy-efficient. Through cuts in

Britain’s farmers operate to some of the highest animal welfare

Vehicle Excise Duty and increased grants, we will significantly

standards in the world and help to preserve the countryside for all

reduce the cost of cars with low carbon emissions. We believe that

of us to enjoy. We will introduce a Bill to ensure honest labelling of

households and businesses should recycle an increasing amount

food and stem the flow of expensive new regulation. We will

of their waste.

support initiatives, such as farmers’ markets and local food
projects, that enable British customers to support Britain’s farmers.

A Conservative Government will guarantee the security and

The Little Red Tractor mark denotes high British animal welfare and

sustainability of Britain’s energy supplies. We will do this by

production standards. We will insist that all publicly procured food

supporting the development of a broad range of renewable

carries this mark.

energy sources. We also recognise that energy efficiency must
play an increasingly important role in our energy policy.

We will press for further reform of the Common Agricultural Policy,
to make it less burdensome for farmers and taxpayers alike. And

Conservatives understand the pressures on the livelihoods of

we will promote legislation to strengthen and update animal

those who work in rural areas.

welfare.

Housing and Planning
• The Right to Buy for housing association tenants
• Protecting the Green Belt
• Action against illegal traveller camps

Transport
• A modern road network
• Review of all speed cameras
• Longer rail franchises

Environment
• Harmful HFCs phased out
• Lower VED for environmentally friendly cars
• Clear labelling for British food

Accountability
• English votes for English laws
• Abolition of regional assemblies
• A stronger Parliament

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 23

Defending our Freedoms
Britain plays a unique role in the world. We are the only nation that

weight, have been allowed to weaken. And our relations with the

is one of the five permanent members of the United Nations

European Union have been mismanaged in a way which threatens

Security Council, a net contributor to the European Union, a

not just British interests, but the capacity of the continent to adapt

member of the G8, at the centre of the Commonwealth family of

flexibly to the future.

nations and a leading member of NATO. We are a global trading
nation with interests in every continent. As the world’s fourth largest

A Conservative Government will strengthen our Armed Forces

economy, we have the potential to be a powerful force for good.

within NATO by spending £2.7 billion more than Labour on the front
line by 2007-08.

These durable strengths allow Britain to defend our interests and
promote our values across the globe.

Those serving in our Armed Forces are vitally important to us, so
we must take care of the people most important to them. A

As a country, we have been in the vanguard of freedom’s advance,

Conservative Government will support service families. They

a friend to the growth of democracy, an advocate of the rule of law,

deserve decent homes, good schools for their children, and the

a defender of the oppressed and a robust protector of our

chance to spend as much time as possible with their families.

people’s security.
We will make the Army stronger. A Conservative Government will
But, under this Government, Britain’s ability to defend its interests

preserve the regiments Labour would abolish and improve the

and secure valuable freedoms has been undermined. Our Armed

supply and procurement of weaponry.

Forces, the vital muscle which allows us to punch above our

“

We should support our Armed Forces and our foreign
policy should serve the British national interest

”

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 25

We will save warships Mr Blair would scrap. A Conservative

its provisions in a referendum within six months of the General

Government will support European co-operation on defence but

Election. We also oppose giving up the valuable freedom which

we strongly believe that such co-operation should take place within

control of our own currency gives us. We will not join the Euro.

the framework of NATO.
In a reformed Europe, the restrictive employment laws of the
If a Conservative Government ever has to take the country to war,

Social Chapter will have to give way to more flexible working. We

we will tell the British people why. Mr Blair misrepresented

will ensure that Britain once again leads the fight for a deregulated

intelligence to make the case for war in Iraq, and failed to plan for

Europe by negotiating the restoration of our opt-out from the Social

the aftermath of Saddam Hussein’s downfall. It is nevertheless the

Chapter.

case that a democratic Iraq would be a powerful beacon of hope
in a troubled part of the world. So we believe that Britain must

The common policies on agriculture and fisheries are

remain committed to rebuilding Iraq and allowing democracy to

unsustainable, damaging to free trade and conservation, and

take hold. And a Conservative Government will work to achieve

waste huge sums of money. The CAP needs further and deeper

peace in the Middle East based on the principle of Israel secure

reform. And, because fisheries would be better administered at the

within its borders and a viable Palestinian state.

national level, we will negotiate to restore national and local control
over British fishing grounds. We are determined to ensure national

Conservatives support the cause of reform in Europe and we will

control in this area.

co-operate with all those who wish to see the EU evolve in a more
flexible, liberal and decentralised direction. We oppose the EU

We will also build on the success of enlargement, making Europe

Constitution and would give the British people the chance to reject

more diverse by working to bring in more nations, including Turkey.

26 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

We value Britain’s membership of the European Union, but our
horizons extend much further. A key element of British foreign
policy under a Conservative Government will be fighting world
poverty. We will support further action on debt relief and will work
to meet the UN target of spending 0.7 per cent of national income
on overseas aid by 2013. We believe that British aid programmes
are among the best in the world, so we will negotiate to increase
British national control over our international aid spending.

Above all, we recognise that there is a vital thread that links open
markets, free trade, property rights, the rule of law, democracy,
economic development and social progress. We will use our global
influence to champion these principles in the interests of the
developing world.

Britain and the World
• No to the Euro and EU Constitution
• More and better aid to tackle global poverty
• Stronger Armed Forces
• Keeping NATO at the heart of our foreign policy

CONSERVATIVE ELECTION MANIFESTO 27

The Choice at this Election
The choice before voters is very clear.

They can either reward Mr Blair for eight years of broken promises
and vote for another five years of talk.

Or they can vote Conservative, to support a party that has taken a
stand and is committed to action on the issues that matter to hardworking Britons.

For detailed information visit www.conservatives.com

28 ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?

Within the first month, we will start the recruitment of an extra 5,000 police officers each year.

Within the first month, we will bring back Matron to take charge and deliver clean and infection-free wards.

Within the first month, our first Budget will cut wasteful government spending,
stop Labour’s third term tax rises and lower taxes.

Within the first day, we will set out plans to give head teachers the power to expel disruptive pupils.

Within the first month, we will set in train 24-hour surveillance at ports of entry.

Within the first day, we will set a date for the referendum on the European Constitution,
in which we will campaign for a “no” vote.

ARE YOU THINKING WHAT WE’RE THINKING?
IT’S TIME FOR ACTION

£2.50
00

9 780850 709261
Promoted by Gavin Barwell on behalf of the Conservative Party both of 25 Victoria Street, London SW1H 0DL
& printed by Colibri Press Ltd, 13-15 Amhurst Terrace, London E8 2BT

