Liberal Democrat
Manifesto 2010

fair taxes
that put money back in your pocket

a fair chance
for every child

a fair future
creating jobs by making Britain greener

a fair deal
by cleaning up politics

Liberal Democrat
Manifesto 2010

table of contents
introduction by Nick Clegg

4

four steps to a fairer Britain

6

our values

8

your money

12

your job

20

your life

32

your family

48

your world

56

your community

70

your say

86

credible and responsible finances

96

index

104

We’ve had 65 years of Labour

I was brought up to believe that the way things are is not the way they have
to be. I was brought up to believe that you should fight for what you believe

and the Conservatives: the

in, and fight for change. So my message for you in this election is simple.

same parties taking turns and

Don’t settle for low politics and broken promises: be more demanding.
Set your sights on the Britain you want for your children and your

making the same mistakes,

grandchildren, and use your vote to make it happen.

letting you down. It is time for

Liberal Democrats are different. When it’s come to the big decisions – on the
banks, on the environment, on the war in Iraq – we are the only party that has

something different. It is time

called it right, every time.

for something better.

Only Liberal Democrats have the big ideas for fundamental, structural
changes in the way our country works to make it fair. Only Liberal Democrats
will shake up the tax system to put £700 back in the pockets of tens of
millions of low and middle-income families, paid for by ensuring the wealthy
pay their fair share. Only Liberal Democrats will break up the banks and start

Elections that can really make a difference don’t come along very often.

Britain building things again, creating a sustainable economy that no longer

But this is one of them.

threatens our planet’s future. Only Liberal Democrats will invest in our schools
to give every child, no matter their background, a fair start in life. And only

This May, you have an opportunity to shape the future of our country for

Liberal Democrats will sort out our rotten political system once and for all.

the better. We’ve had 65 years of Labour and the Conservatives: the same
parties taking turns and making the same mistakes, letting you down. They

A strong vote for the Liberal Democrats means the end of red-blue, blue-red

have taught people to expect little from politics, and get less.

politics. It means the end of the stitch-up between the two old parties.
It means the beginning of real change that works for you.

It is time for something different. It is time for something better.
Doesn’t it make you angry that after 65 years of red-blue government, a
child’s chances in life are still more determined by their parents’ bank balance
than by their own hopes and dreams? Doesn’t it make you angry that the
banks have been allowed to ride roughshod over our economy, and are still
handing out bonuses by the bucket load? That politics is still the plaything
of wealthy donors and corrupt MPs? That despite endless warm words from
politicians, our climate is in danger? That the poorest are the ones who pay
the biggest chunk of their income in tax?

our first priorities:
4 steps to a fairer Britain
fair taxes

a fair future

that put money back in your pocket

creating jobs by making Britain greener

• The first £10,000 you earn tax-free: a tax cut of £700 for
most people

• Break up the banks and get them lending again to protect
real businesses

• 3.6 million low earners and pensioners freed from income
tax completely

• Honesty about the tough choices needed to cut the deficit
• Green growth and jobs that last by investing in infrastructure

• Paid for in full by closing loopholes that unfairly benefit
the wealthy and polluters

a fair chance

a fair deal

for every child

by cleaning up politics

• Ensure children get the individual attention they need by
cutting class sizes

• Put trust back into politics by giving you the right to sack
corrupt MPs

• Made possible by investing £2.5 billion in schools targeted
to help struggling pupils

• Restore and protect hard-won British civil liberties with a
Freedom Bill

• Give schools the freedom to make the right choices for
their pupils

• Overhaul Westminster completely: fair votes, an elected
House of Lords, all politicians to pay full British taxes

introduction: our values

bringing back fairness

This election can be and must be a turning point for Britain. This must be

At the root of Britain’s problems today is the failure to distribute power

a moment of great change, so that we emerge from the recession as a fairer,

fairly between people. Political power has been hoarded by politicians and

greener, stronger and more united society. To do that, we need to be clear

civil servants; economic power has been hoarded by big businesses. Both

and honest about the failures that caused the problems we face, and set a

kinds of power have been stripped from ordinary citizens, leaving us with a

clear, hopeful course for a different, better future.

fragile society marked by inequality, environmental degradation and boom-

Britain is struggling to emerge from a long and difficult recession. Families
are finding it hard to make ends meet. Millions are unemployed, and millions
more have taken pay cuts or reduced hours to stay in their jobs. And there

bust economics. If government merely tinkers at the edges – the Labour
and Conservative approach – Britain’s problems will not be solved. We can
change this only with radical action.

are deeper problems too. Britain, for all its many strengths, is still too unequal

The Liberal Democrat philosophy is built on a simple ambition: to distribute

and unfair, a country where the circumstances of your birth and the income of

power fairly among people. From that goal of fairness spring the four priorities

your parents still profoundly affect your chances in life. Our children’s future is

which form the backbone of this manifesto. Each will redistribute power of a

threatened by climate change, which we have done far too little to stop. And

different kind, be it economic, social, political or financial. Each will change

the political system is in crisis.

Britain for the better.

Britain needs a fresh start. We need hope for a different, better future.

Those four changes are spelt out in detail in this manifesto. They will make
Britain the fair country people want it to be. They are:

That is what this manifesto is all about. We believe that the future must be
built on a different foundation: fairness. We believe that there are systemic
failures that underlie every one of the major problems we face. And that gives

• Fair taxes that put money back in your pocket.
• A fair chance for every child.

us the chance to reshape our country, fundamentally, for the better.
• A fair future, creating jobs by making Britain greener.
Fairness is an essential British value. It is at the centre of how the vast
majority of British people live their lives, but it has been forgotten by those at
the top. Instead, greed and self-interest have held sway over the government
and parts of the economy in recent decades. They have forgotten that growth

• A fair deal for you from politicians.
our tax plan
We propose the most radical tax reform in a generation, cutting taxes for

must be shared and sustainable if it is to last.

millions paid for by closing loopholes at the top and increasing taxes on

8

Our core aim is to hard-wire fairness back into national life. That way

polluting aviation. No tax system should try to create total equality of income

we can build a stronger society with growth that lasts, fairness and

– but it can and should help redistribute wealth and power, to alleviate the

opportunity for all.

worst excesses of inequality.

our values

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

9

our schools plan

change that works for you

We will give every child the fair start they deserve by providing cash to
reduce class sizes and increase one-to-one tuition. This is the best way to
ensure, over the long term, that every child has opportunities, no matter their
background, their home town or their parents’ bank balance.

This manifesto is not limited to these four structural changes. It is a full
programme for a Liberal Democrat government, setting out our approach
to all public services, to fiscal discipline, and to Britain’s place in the
changing world.

our economic plan

In formulating our policies we have been driven by our one abiding concern:

Our vision is of a very different economy, balanced and sustainable both

fairness. We know these are difficult times. But we also know there is a way

financially and environmentally. We will reduce the deficit, break up the banks,

out, a way to build a fairer, greener and stronger future.

and ensure that Britain leads in developing the new green economy that the
world needs.

It will take courage and commitment to make Britain truly fair for our children,
and for the future. It will take an extraordinary government, different from
every one that has come before. That is what the Liberal Democrats offer,

our plan for cleaning up politics

which no other party can at this election.
The final change is the one that makes the others possible: political reform.
The current system exists to block change. We will stamp out corruption and

If you want real change, choose the Liberal Democrats.

abuse by giving people power to sack corrupt MPs, end big money politics,
and make sure those who seek to sit in Parliament pay full UK taxes. We will
reinvigorate our democracy by dispersing power, breaking open Westminster
and Whitehall and embracing fair votes for every level of election.

a green future: protecting the planet
Liberal Democrats believe that protecting the environment is one

These four changes will transform Britain. They

of the greatest challenges this generation faces. We must hand

are our core priorities. The stronger we are as a

on to our children a planet worth living on. That requires action

party, the more power and influence we will have

climate change minister’s. It is because we believe concern for the

across government – this is everybody’s responsibility, not just one
environment is important in every part of people’s lives that we have

to make them happen, to change our country for
the better. They are all essential to delivering real

identified policies in every chapter of this manifesto to protect the
planet. These policies are highlighted with green side tabs.

change in Britain.

10

our values

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

11

your money. Liberal
Democrats want to make
the tax and benefits system
fair, so that everyone, be
they young or old, can
afford to get by.

fair taxes and fair benefits to help every family
get by
Liberal Democrats want to make the tax and benefits system fair, so that
everyone, be they young or old, can afford to get by. We have plans for the
most radical, far-reaching tax reforms in a generation.
These changes are desperately needed. Conservative and Labour
governments have changed Britain into one of the most unequal societies
in the developed world, where ordinary people struggle to make ends meet
while the richest benefit from tax breaks. The poorest fifth of the population
pay a higher proportion of their income in tax than the richest fifth.
We set out in this manifesto a clear plan to bring the budget back under
control, being honest about the tough choices we need to take. We will cut
taxes for millions of working people and pensioners, paid for by making
sure that the very wealthy pay their fair share and that polluting air travel is
properly taxed. We will boost the state pension by immediately restoring
the link with earnings growth.

tax fairness for everyone
Under a Liberal Democrat government, you will not have to pay any income
tax on the first £10,000 you earn. This will put £700 back into the pockets
of millions of people on low and middle incomes and free 3.6 million more
people on low incomes from having to pay any income tax at all. In this way,
we will help people who are struggling to make ends meet and provide an
incentive to work and save.
This change will be paid for by:
• Giving tax relief on pensions only at the basic rate, so that everyone
gets the same tax relief on their pension contributions.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

13

• Taxing capital gains at the same rates as income, so that all the
money you make is taxed in the same way.
• Tackling tax avoidance and evasion, with new powers for HM
Revenue & Customs and a law to ensure properties can’t avoid stamp
duty if they are put into an offshore trust.
• Ensuring pollution is properly taxed by replacing the per-passenger Air
Passenger Duty with a per-plane duty (PPD), ensuring that air freight
is taxed for the first time. We will also introduce an additional, higher
rate of PPD on domestic flights if realistic alternative and less polluting
travel is available.
• Introducing a Mansion Tax at a rate of 1 per cent on properties worth
over £2 million, paid on the value of the property above that level.
In addition we will reform the system of ‘non-domiciled’ status, allowing
people to hold such status for up to seven years; after that time they will
become subject to tax on all offshore income in the same way as domiciled
British citizens.

14

dealing with the deficit

We have already identified over £15 billion of savings in government spending

The health of the economy depends on the health of the country’s finances.

for additional spending commitments. All our spending commitments will be

Public borrowing has reached unsustainable levels, and needs to be brought

funded from this pool of identified savings, with all remaining savings used to

under control to protect the country’s economic future.

reduce the deficit.

A Liberal Democrat government will be straight with people about the tough

We must ensure the timing is right. If spending is cut too soon, it would

choices ahead. Not only must waste be eliminated, but we must also be bold

undermine the much-needed recovery and cost jobs. We will base the timing

about finding big areas of spending that can be cut completely. That way we

of cuts on an objective assessment of economic conditions, not political

can control borrowing, protect the services people rely on most and still find

dogma. Our working assumption is that the economy will be in a stable

some money to invest in building a fair future for everyone.

enough condition to bear cuts from the beginning of 2011–12.

per year, vastly in excess of the £5 billion per year that we have set aside

your money

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

15

Through making tough choices, as well as increasing efficiency and reducing

can be used to pay down the deficit further. These will include:

bureaucracy across government, our savings will include:
• Saying no to the like-for-like replacement of the Trident nuclear
• Setting a £400 pay rise cap for all public sector workers, initially for

weapons system, which could cost £100 billion. We will hold a full

two years, ensuring that the lowest paid are eligible for the biggest

defence review to establish the best alternative for Britain’s future

percentage rise.

security.
• Reforming public sector pensions to ensure that they are sustainable

• Restricting tax credits.

and affordable for the long term, with an independent review to agree
• Ending government payments into Child Trust Funds.

a settlement that is fair for all taxpayers as well as for public servants.

• Introducing a Banking Levy so that banks pay for the financial support

• Better government IT procurement, investigating the potential of

they have received, until such time as they can be split up in order to

different approaches such as cloud computing and open-source

insulate retail banking from investment risks.

software.

• Scrapping ID cards and the next generation of biometric passports.

• A wholesale review of value for money in the public sector based on
the findings of the National Audit Office and the House of Commons

• Cancelling Eurofighter Tranche 3b.

Public Accounts Committee.

• Scaling back HomeBuy schemes.

We will establish a Council on Financial Stability, involving representatives of
all parties, the Governor of the Bank of England and the Chair of the Financial

• Reforming prisons, including through reducing the number of short
sentences.

Services Authority. This group would agree the timeframe and scale of a
deficit reduction plan to set the framework (not the detail) for the CSR and
seek to promote it externally and domestically. Any agreement would be

• Cutting back burdensome regulation of local authorities.

without prejudice to parties retaining and advocating distinctive views on a
wide range of issues (such as fair taxes and spending priorities).

Further details of our savings, including a number of smaller savings
items, can be found in the tables annexed to the chapter on Credible and

16

Responsible Finances on page 96.

fairness in pensions, savings and benefits

In the longer term, as part of a Comprehensive Spending Review (CSR)

Labour has created a hugely complex and unfair benefits system, and it

involving wide consultation, we will seek to identify additional savings which

needs to be reformed. Pensions and savings have been undermined.

your money

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

17

We will make pensions and benefits fair and reward savers by:
• Immediately restoring the link between the basic state pension and
earnings. We will uprate the state pension annually by whichever is
the higher of growth in earnings, growth in prices or 2.5 per cent.
• Increasing the income tax threshold to £10,000.
• Giving people greater flexibility in accessing part of their personal
pension fund early, for example to help in times of financial hardship.
• Giving people control over their pension by scrapping the rule that
compels you to buy an annuity when you reach age 75.
• Allowing individuals to save through our UK Infrastructure Bank,
offering stable long-term returns.
• Meeting the government’s obligations towards Equitable Life
policyholders who have suffered loss. We will set up a swift, simple,
transparent and fair payment scheme.
• Ending the rollercoaster of tax credit overpayments by fixing payments
for six months at a time. We will also target payments towards those
who need them most.
• Reforming Winter Fuel Payments to extend them to all severely
disabled people, paid for by delaying age-related Winter Fuel
Payments until people reach 65. We will continue to pay Winter Fuel
Payments to all current recipients of Pension Credit.

18

your money

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

19

your job. Liberal
Democrats want to
build an economy that
is based on innovation
and sustainability, where
the infrastructure the
country needs is in
place for individuals and
businesses to thrive.

opportunities for all in a fair, green economy
Liberal Democrats want to build an economy that is based on innovation
and sustainability, where the infrastructure the country needs is in place for
individuals and businesses to thrive. Our aim is to deliver growth that lasts
and is environmentally sustainable.
Decades of Labour and Conservative rule have created an unsustainable
economy, preoccupied with the artificial wealth of inflated property prices
rather than productive work and invention. They have been obsessed by the
‘Square Mile’ – the City of London – instead of supporting all 100,000 square
miles of Britain.
To boost the economy and create jobs for those who need them, we will
begin our term of office with a one-year economic stimulus and job creation
package. To sustain jobs and growth for the long term, we will set up an
Infrastructure Bank to direct private finance to essential projects such as
new rail services and green energy, building the environmentally sustainable
economy that is needed for the long term. And to ensure that the economy is
never again destabilised by high-risk financial industries, we will break up the
banks and build up diverse local and regional sources of business finance.

sustainable finance for business growth
We have all learned an important lesson from the credit crunch and the
recession: we cannot build an economy on financial gambling. Radical reform
of the financial infrastructure is needed to create and sustain jobs, and move
towards a sustainable and balanced economy where businesses in every
town, city and region can grow.
That starts with banking reform. Banks must be made to behave responsibly.
And we need to support and develop new ways of financing growing
businesses, with equity rather than debt, and without relying too heavily on

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

21

the financial centre of the City of London. More diverse sources of finance will

the new green economy that the world needs. We recognise that strong

provide the funding needed to develop innovative new products and reverse

businesses create and sustain jobs and a Liberal Democrat government

the decline in the UK’s manufacturing base.

will support them in doing so.

In order to put the economy on a new footing, we will:

Liberal Democrats will begin our term in office with a one-year job creation

• Break up the banks, to ensure taxpayers are never again expected
to underwrite high-risk banking. We would establish a clear separation
between low-risk retail banking and high-risk investment banking,
and encourage the development of local and regional banks. We

and green economic stimulus package. We have identified £3.1 billion of
public spending that can be used to create 100,000 jobs. This programme
will be a first step towards our target for a zero-carbon Britain by 2050.
Our green stimulus plan will create 100,000 jobs. It comprises:

will introduce a Banking Levy, so that banks pay for their tax-payer
guarantee, until the break-up is complete.

• Investing up to £400 million in refurbishing shipyards in the North of
England and Scotland so that they can manufacture offshore wind

• Get the banks lending responsibly again. The taxpayers’
representatives on the boards of the banks the public own or partown should insist banks lend to viable businesses on fair terms again.

turbines and other marine renewable energy equipment. As part of
this scheme we will write off backdated business rates demands from
before April 2008 for businesses in ports.

• Ensure that the bonus system can never again encourage banks to
behave in a way that puts the financial system at risk or offers rewards

• Launching an ‘Eco Cash-Back’ scheme, for one year only, which
will give you £400 if you install double glazing, replace an old boiler,

for failure.

or install micro-generation. If you choose micro-generation, you will
• Support the establishment of Local Enterprise Funds and Regional

be able to sell the energy back to the National Grid at a profit, with
a more attractive feed-in tariff than under current government plans.

Stock Exchanges. Local Enterprise Funds will help local investors
put money into growing businesses in their own part of the country
and support the development of new products from research to

• Setting aside extra money for schools who want to improve the

production. Regional Stock Exchanges will be a route for businesses

energy efficiency of their buildings. They will pay back the loan over

to access equity without the heavy regulatory requirements of a

time from energy savings, creating a rolling fund to help insulate

London listing.

every public building.
• Bringing 250,000 empty homes back into use. People who own

creating jobs that last

22

these homes will get a grant or a cheap loan to renovate them so that

The new economy must be very different from the old if it is to be sustainable,

they can be used: grants if the home is for social housing, loans for

not just financially, but environmentally too. If we start now, Britain can lead

private use.

your job

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

23

• Investing £140 million in a bus scrappage scheme that helps bus

a long-term strategic remit. It would have the ability to reject or

companies to replace old polluting buses with new, accessible low-

accept proposals based on whether they are financially viable or

carbon ones and creates jobs.

within its remit.

We will also create hundreds of thousands of opportunities for young people

• Start with government seed funding which it can use as a capital base

affected by the recession. A work placement scheme with up to 800,000

to borrow against. This seed funding could be raised from the sell-off

places will ensure that young people have the opportunity to gain skills,

of the student loan book or the Tote as the government has already

qualifications and work experience even if they can’t find a job. Young people

proposed. In addition borrowing could be secured against or raised

on the scheme would be paid £55 a week for up to three months. We will

from government-owned assets such as the Dartford Crossing. We

also fund 15,000 extra Foundation Degree places, fully meet the up-front

will investigate other ways of raising seed capital such as auctioning

costs of adult apprenticeships, and increase the Adult Learning Grant to £45

airport landing slots and parts of the radio spectrum.

a week for 18–24 year-olds in Further Education.
To help the transition to a green economy over the longer-term, we will set
up a United Kingdom Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) to attract private finance –

enabling enterprise that benefits Britain

essential to delivering the much-needed expansion of Britain’s transport and
Liberal Democrats believe in the value of entrepreneurship and enterprise,

energy infrastructure when public finances are tight. The UKIB will:

recognising that thriving businesses are vital to create the wealth this country
needs. We need to ensure a strong competitive environment by providing

• Create a new route to provide capital, guarantees and equity to
infrastructure projects, using public money to attract upfront private

a level playing field for all businesses, encouraging a diverse, sustainable

investment.

economy for the long term.

• Increase the funding available from the private sector by tapping into

Liberal Democrats will:

the funds of institutional investors, namely annuity funds looking for a
• Reduce the burden of unnecessary red tape by properly assessing

home in the UK.

the cost and effectiveness of regulations before and after they are
• Reduce the cost of long-term funding as compared with the Private

introduced, using ‘sunset clauses’ to ensure the need for a regulation
is regularly reviewed, and working towards the principle of ‘one in,

Finance Initiative.

one out’ for new rules.
• Provide the opportunity for retail investors to save in safe long-term
• Put an end to the so-called ‘gold-plating’ of EU rules, so that

assets.

British businesses are not disadvantaged relative to their European
• Be a stand-alone public entity, independent from government but with

24

your job

competitors.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

25

• Reform business rates, creating a fairer system where rates are based
on site values rather than rental values and are the responsibility of
local authorities. We will make small company relief automatic and
also seek to ensure that the burden is spread more equitably between
small and large businesses.
• Reform Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) to focus solely on
economic development, removing duplication with other parts of
government and allowing substantial budget reductions. We will give
responsibility for economic development to local authorities. Where
existing RDAs have strong local support, they may continue with
refocused economic development objectives. Where they do not, they
will be scrapped and their functions taken over by local authorities.
• Ensure that takeover rules serve the UK economy. We will restore
a public interest test so that a broader range of factors than just
competition can be considered by regulators when takeovers are
proposed and we will ensure that the outcome of takeover bids is
determined by the long-term shareholder base. We will reintroduce
the Operating and Financial Review, dropped in November 2005, to
ensure that directors’ social and environmental duties will have to be
covered in company reporting.

supporting mutuals, co-ops and social enterprises

• Support public investment in the roll-out of superfast broadband,
targeted first at those areas which are least likely to be provided for
by the market.

important role to play in the creation of a more balanced and mixed economy.
Mutuals give people a proper stake in the places they work, spreading wealth
through society, and bringing innovative and imaginative business ideas to

• Keep the tax regime and allowances that apply to the oil and gas

bear on meeting local needs.

industry under review to secure the maximum long-term benefit to
the UK economy of the remaining North Sea reserves.

We will:

• Use the substantial purchasing power of government to expand the
markets for green products and technologies.
26

We believe that mutuals, co-operatives and social enterprises have an

• Give financial regulators a clear objective of maintaining a diversity
of providers in the financial services industry.

your job

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

27

• Respect the convention that the science budget, once allocated

• Seek to turn Northern Rock into a building society.

through the Comprehensive Spending Review process, is not used for
• Give both Royal Mail and post offices a long-term future, by

other purposes.

separating Post Office Ltd from the Royal Mail and retaining Post
• Ensure that the decisions on the funding of research projects are

Office Ltd in full public ownership. 49 per cent of Royal Mail will be
sold to create funds for investment. The ownership of the other 51 per

made on the basis of peer review not Whitehall interference, while

cent will be divided between an employee trust and the government.

recognising the need for government to identify broad strategic
priorities in a transparent manner.

• Encourage community-owned renewable energy schemes where
• Ensure that all state-funded research, including clinical trials, is

local people benefit from the power produced.

publicly accessible and that the results are published and subject to
• Pass a new Mutuals, Co-operatives and Social Enterprises Bill to

peer review.

bring the law up to date and give responsibility for mutuals to a
• Reform science funding to ensure that genuinely innovative scientific

specific minister.

research is identified and supported, instead of basing funding
decisions on narrow impact factors.

creating a dynamic environment for science
and innovation

We need to safeguard the future of the science and engineering workforce
and break the vicious cycle linking fewer University science, engineering and

Britain’s future depends on a vibrant research base and the ability of
innovators to exploit the country’s intellectual capital to generate new homegrown high tech industries.

maths applicants to fewer teachers with specialist qualifications. We will:
• Tackle the gender gap at all levels of scientific study and research to

Despite Government rhetoric, overall public funding of science in real terms is

help increase the supply of scientists.

no higher than it was two decades ago. Britain’s Research and Development
spend as a proportion of GDP remains near the bottom of the G8. There is no

It is vital that policy, especially that relating to public health, criminal justice

room for complacency.

and environmental protection, benefits from being based on the best available
evidence. We will:

In the current economic climate it is not possible to commit to growth in
• Safeguard academic freedom and the independence of scientific

spending, but Liberal Democrats recognise the importance of science

28

investment to the recovery and to the reshaping of the economy, making it

advisers by amending the Ministerial Code to prevent government

less reliant on the City of London and creating new green industries instead.

from bullying or mistreating advisers and distorting evidence or

We will:

statistics.

your job

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

29

fair treatment at work for everyone
Liberal Democrats want to build a society where everyone has the
opportunity to get on in life. Most businesses do a great job of supporting
their employees, but there is more to do to tackle discrimination on the
grounds of gender, sexuality, age, race, religion or disability. We want to give
employees fair opportunities to make the best use of their talents, and greater
control over their working lives and conditions.
Women are still paid less than men. It can be hard to juggle work and family
life. People from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities are still more
likely to suffer discrimination. And there are far too many barriers to work for
people with disabilities.
We will change this by:
• Extending the right to request flexible working to all employees.
• Requiring name-blind job application forms to reduce sex and race
discrimination in employment, initially for every company with over
100 employees.
• Introducing fair pay audits for every company with over 100
employees to combat discrimination in pay, for example against
women. We will also require all public companies to declare in full all
remunerations of £200,000 per year or more.
• Giving disabled job seekers better practical help to get to work, using
voluntary and private sector providers, as well as JobCentre Plus
services. We will also reform Access to Work, so disabled people
can apply for jobs with funding already in place for equipment and
adaptation that they need.
Our policies on secure and sustainable energy are set out in the
Your World chapter.
30

your job

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

31

your life. Liberal
Democrats believe in
investing in and improving
the quality of our public
services. They are the
cornerstone of a fair society,
opening up opportunities
and providing support and
help when needed.

a fair deal and the help you need from public
services
Liberal Democrats believe in investing in and improving the quality of
our public services. They are the cornerstone of a fair society, opening
up opportunities and providing support and help when needed.
Despite increased investment, there are still problems. Too many children
leave school without the knowledge and skills to be successful. The NHS
often feels too remote and complex for patients to handle, while doctors
and nurses spend too much time trying to meet government targets. And
inequality is rife: in Britain today your chances in life are more determined
by your parents’ income than anywhere else in the developed world.
We will provide a fair start for all children by giving schools the extra
money they need to cut class sizes and provide additional one-to-one
teaching, and by setting schools free to give all children the best possible
education. We will scrap unfair university tuition fees so everyone has the
chance to get a degree, regardless of their parents’ income. We will help
the NHS work better with the money it has by using the savings we have
found to protect front-line services, such as cancer treatment, mental
health care, maternity services, dementia care and preventive medicine.

the best chance for every child
Liberal Democrats want every child to receive an excellent education, to
unlock children’s potential and to ensure that they can succeed in life.
Too many children are still leaving school without the knowledge and skills
to be successful. And your family background still has a huge effect: a
typical child from a poor family will fall behind a richer classmate by the age
of seven and never catch up. We will seek to ensure that all pupils leaving
primary and secondary education have the skills they need.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

33

We will free schools from the present stranglehold of central government

First to attract more top graduates into teaching. We will improve

control and encourage them to be genuinely innovative.

training for existing teachers over the course of their careers to

We will invest additional money in the schools system to allow schools to
cut class sizes, pay for one-to-one tuition, introduce catch-up classes, or
take other steps to ensure that every child has the best possible education.
We will therefore ensure that every neighbourhood is served by an excellent

keep them up to date with best practice. We will seek to ensure
that science at Key Stage 4 and above is taught by appropriately
qualified teachers.
• Confront bullying, including homophobic bullying, and include
bullying prevention in teacher training.

local school or college.
We will:

• Set aside extra money for schools to improve the energy efficiency
of their buildings. They will pay back the loan over time from energy

• Increase the funding of the most disadvantaged pupils, around one

savings, creating a rolling fund to help insulate other public buildings.

million children. We will invest £2.5 billion in this ‘Pupil Premium’ to
boost education opportunities for every child. This is additional money
going into the schools budget, and headteachers will be free to spend
it in the best interests of children.

a better education: standards and the curriculum
To make the most of their years at school, every child needs an education

• The extra money could be used to cut class sizes, attract the best

tailored to suit their abilities and interests. The restrictive National Curriculum

teachers, offer extra one-to-one tuition and provide for after-school

and the arbitrary split between academic and vocational qualifications

and holiday support. This will allow an average primary school to cut

isn’t working.

classes to 20 and an average secondary school to introduce catch-up
We will:

classes for 160 pupils.
• Improve discipline by early intervention to tackle the poor basic

• Establish a fully independent Educational Standards Authority

education of those children who are otherwise most likely to

(ESA) with real powers to stand up to ministers and restore

misbehave and become demotivated.

confidence in standards. The ESA would oversee the examinations
system, the systems of school inspection and accountability, and

• Guarantee Special Educational Needs (SEN) diagnostic assessments

the detail of the curriculum. It would replace the Qualifications and

for all 5-year-olds, improve SEN provision and improve SEN training

Curriculum Development Agency and the Office of the Qualifications

for teachers.

and Examinations Regulator (OFQUAL), and include OFSTED, the
schools inspectorate.

• Improve teacher training by increasing the size of the school-based
Graduate Teacher Programme and support the expansion of Teach

34

your life

• Replace the bureaucratic Early Years Foundation Stage with a

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

35

slimmed-down framework which includes a range of educational

freeing schools for excellence

approaches and enough flexibility for every young child.
Liberal Democrats want an education system where all schools will have
• Axe the rigid National Curriculum, and replace it with a slimmed

the freedom to innovate, not be dictated to by central government.

down ‘Minimum Curriculum Entitlement’ to be delivered by every
We will:

state-funded school.

• Introduce an Education Freedom Act banning politicians from getting

• Scale back Key Stage 2 tests at age 11, and use teacher
assessment, with external checking, to improve the quality

involved in the day-to-day running of schools. Teachers are held back

of marking.

by constant government interference which distracts from teaching.
We would cut the size of the central department of Children, Schools

• Create a General Diploma to bring GCSEs, A-Levels and high quality

and Families, and focus its activities on a few strategic priorities.

vocational qualifications together, enabling pupils to mix vocational

Local authorities will not run schools, but will have a central strategic

and academic learning.

role, including responsibility for oversight of school performance and
fair admissions. They will be expected to intervene where school
leadership or performance is weak.

• Give 14–19 year-olds the right to take up a course at college,
rather than at school, if it suits them better. This will enable all

• Give all schools the freedom to innovate. We will ensure a level

children to choose to study, for example, separate sciences or

playing field for admissions and funding and replace Academies

modern languages at GCSE, or a vocational subject.

with our own model of ‘Sponsor-Managed Schools’. These schools
• Seek to close the unfair funding gap between pupils in school sixth

will be commissioned by and accountable to local authorities and
not Whitehall, and would allow other appropriate providers, such as

forms and Further Education colleges, as resources allow.

educational charities and parent groups, to be involved in delivering
state-funded education.

• Scrap the Government’s plan to criminalise those who leave
education between ages 16 and 18.

• Allow parents to continue to choose faith-based schools within the
• Reform league tables to give parents more meaningful information

36

state-funded sector and allow the establishment of new faith schools.

which truly reflects the performance of a school. Schools should be

We will ensure that all faith schools develop an inclusive admissions

working to get the best from all their pupils but government league

policy and end unfair discrimination on grounds of faith when

tables are forcing them to focus on those who are just above or

recruiting staff, except for those principally responsible for optional

below the key C-grade borderline.

religious instruction.

your life

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

37

courses. And we will ensure that adults who wish to study, including those
wanting to return to education later on in life, are able to do so without being
put off by the burden of debt. We will:
• Scrap unfair university tuition fees for all students taking their first
degree, including those studying part-time, saving them over £10,000
each. We have a financially responsible plan to phase fees out over
six years, so that the change is affordable even in these difficult
economic times, and without cutting university income. We will
immediately scrap fees for final year students.
• Reform current bursary schemes to create a National Bursary Scheme
for students, so that each university gets a bursary budget suited to
the needs of its students. These bursaries would be awarded both
on the basis of studying strategic subjects (such as sciences and
mathematics) and financial hardship.
• Replace wasteful quangos (the Skills Funding Agency and the Higher
Education Funding Council for England) with a single Council for Adult
Skills and Higher Education.
• Scrap the arbitrary target of 50 per cent of young people attending
university, focussing effort instead on a balance of college education,

• Reform the existing rigid national pay and conditions rules to give

vocational training and apprenticeships.

schools and colleges more freedom, including in offering financial
and other incentives to attract and retain excellent teachers, while

• Start discussions with universities and schools about the design of

ensuring that all staff receive the minimum national pay award.

a trial scheme whereby the best students from the lowest achieving
schools are guaranteed a place in Higher Education.

opportunities at college and university

38

• As part of our immediate job creation package, fund 15,000 new

There should be a wide range of opportunities for everyone at the age of 16.

places on Foundation Degree courses and fully fund the off-the-job

Liberal Democrats believe that education is important for all young people,

costs of adult apprenticeships, which currently have to be met by

and will create, finally, a level playing field between academic and vocational

employers, for one year.

your life

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

39

• Better target spending on adult skills. We will end Train to Gain

rest, scrap Strategic Health Authorities and seek to limit the pay and

funding for large companies, restricting the funds to the small and

bonuses of top NHS managers so that none are paid more than the

medium-sized firms that need the support. The money saved will

Prime Minister.

be used to cover the course fees for adults taking a first Level 3
• Make the NHS work better by extending best practice on improving

qualification (such as A-levels or an adult apprenticeship), allowing

hospital discharge, maximising the number of day case operations,

a significant reduction in the overall budget.

reducing delays prior to operations, and where possible moving
consultations into the community.

protecting and improving our NHS
• Integrate health and social care to create a seamless service,
We are proud of the NHS – it’s built on the basic British principle of fairness.

ending bureaucratic barriers and saving money to allow people to

Liberal Democrats believe that we can improve the NHS; in fact, we believe

stay in their homes for longer rather than going into hospital or long-

it’s our duty to do so at a time like this when budgets are tight. We all know

term residential care.

that too much precious NHS money is wasted on bureaucracy, and doctors
and nurses spend too much time trying to meet government targets.

• Use the money for Labour’s flawed Personal Care At Home Bill

So our first priority is to increase spending in some parts of the NHS by cutting
waste in others. We have identified specific savings that can be made in
management costs, bureaucracy and quangos, and we will reinvest that money
back into the health care you need. Because of the rising costs of treatments
and an ageing population, there will be particular pressure on services like
cancer treatment, mental health care, maternity services, and dementia

to provide guaranteed respite care for the one million carers who
work the longest hours. We will establish an independent commission,
with cross-party support, to develop proposals for long-term care
of the elderly.
• Prioritise dementia research within the health research and
development budget.

care; only by going through this process of finding savings elsewhere can we
protect these services in the coming years. The NHS is a huge system, and

• Improve access to counselling for people with mental health

we will make changes to ensure it works as effectively as possible.

problems, by continuing the roll-out of cognitive and behavioural

We will:

therapies.
• Reduce the ill health and crime caused by excessive drinking. We

• Give priority to preventing people getting ill by linking payments to

support a ban on below-cost selling, and are in favour of the principle

health boards and GPs more directly to prevention measures.

of minimum pricing, subject to detailed work to establish how it
• Cut the size of the Department of Health by half, abolish unnecessary
quangos such as Connecting for Health and cut the budgets of the

40

your life

could be used in tackling problems of irresponsible drinking. We will
also review the complex, ill-thought-through system of taxation for

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

41

alcohol to ensure it tackles binge drinking without unfairly penalising

• Empowering local communities to improve health services through
elected Local Health Boards, which will take over the role of Primary

responsible drinkers, pubs and important local industries.

Care Trust boards in commissioning care for local people, working
• Save lives and reduce pressure on NHS budgets by cutting air

in co-operation with local councils. Over time, Local Health Boards

pollution. We will cancel plans for a third runway at Heathrow and

should be able to take on greater responsibility for revenue and

other airport expansion in the South East, and reduce pollution from

resources to allow local people to fund local services which need

vehicle exhausts through tighter regulation. We will aim to fully meet

extra money.

European air quality targets by 2012.
• Giving every patient the right to choose to register with the GP they
want, without being restricted by where they live, and the right to

more control over the health care you need

access their GP by email.

Liberal Democrats believe that one important way to improve the NHS is to
make care flexible, designed to suit what patients need, not what managers

• Ensuring that local GPs are directly involved in providing out-ofhours care.

want. And we believe that care would improve if local people had more
control over how their health services were run.

• Reforming payments to GPs so that those who accept patients from

The NHS often feels too remote and complex. Local services – especially
maternity wards and accident and emergency departments – keep being
closed, even though local people desperately want them to stay open. People
often struggle to get convenient access to GP services, and poorer areas are
less well served by the NHS, contributing to widening health inequalities.

areas with the worst health and deprivation scores receive an extra
payment for each one they take.
• Giving Local Health Boards the freedom to commission services
for local people from a range of different types of provider, including
for example staff co-operatives, on the basis of a level playing field
in any competitive tendering – ending any current bias in favour of

We will change this by:

private providers.
• Sharply reducing centralised targets and bureaucracy, replacing
them with entitlements guaranteeing that patients get diagnosis and
treatment on time. If they do not, the NHS will pay for the treatment

quality care for all patients

to be provided privately.
We all need to be assured that, if we become unwell, the care we get will
be of good quality. Most of all, we need to be confident that our safety comes

• Putting front-line staff in charge of their ward or unit budgets,

42

and allowing staff to establish employee trusts giving them real

first, and that the treatment we get doesn’t put us in more danger. We will

involvement and a say over how their service is run.

introduce a series of reforms to improve patient safety.

your life

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

43

We will:
• Require hospitals to be open about mistakes, and always tell patients
if something has gone wrong.
• Make it illegal for a Local Health Board to allow a doctor to work in
the UK without passing robust language and competence tests.
• Clamp down on anyone who is aggressive or abusive to staff in
accident and emergency departments. We would encourage better
working relationships between hospitals and the local police to
provide an increased police presence at times of high risk, and
increase prosecutions. At the same time, we will ensure that problem
drinkers or substance abusers are referred for appropriate treatment.
It is deeply disappointing that the Government has failed to provide adequate
support for those affected by the contamination of blood products with HIV.
A Liberal Democrat government will establish a working group involving patient
groups to determine appropriate levels of financial assistance.

access to culture and sport
Liberal Democrats believe that the arts are a central part of civic and

will give people from all backgrounds and generations the opportunity to

community life. They contribute to innovation, education, diversity, and social

participate in sports.

inclusion, and the creative industries are one of the fastest growing sectors

Liberal Democrats will:

of the economy. Britain’s culture and heritage play a vital role in attracting
visitors to the UK and boosting the very important tourism industry. We will
foster an environment in which all forms of creativity are able to flourish.

the Government Art Collection for greater public use.

We are proud that Britain is hosting the Olympic and Paralympic Games
in 2012, and we support bids for other high-profile events such as the 2018
World Cup – but we believe that grassroots sport is just as important. We

44

• Maintain free entry to national museums and galleries and open up

your life

• Set up a ‘Creative Enterprise Fund’ offering training, mentoring and
small grants or loans to help creative businesses get off the ground.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

45

• Cut red tape for putting on live music. We will reintroduce the
rule allowing two performers of unamplified music in any licensed
premises without the need for an entertainment licence, allow licensed
venues for up to 200 people to host live music without the need for
an entertainment licence, and remove the requirement for schools
and hospitals to apply for a licence.
• Reform the National Lottery. We will change the way the National
Lottery is taxed from a ticket tax to a gross profits tax, which is
forecast to deliver more for good causes and the Exchequer.
• Use cash in dormant betting accounts to set up a capital fund for
improving local sports facilities and supporting sports clubs.
• Close loopholes that allow playing fields to be sold or built upon
without going through the normal planning procedures.

A strong and diverse media, free from government interference and pressure
is essential to a free and democratic society. We will:
• Ensure that the BBC remains strong, free from interference and
securely funded, not least to provide impartial news, independent of
political and commercial pressures. We will also ensure that the BBC
does not undermine the viability of other media providers through
unfair competition based on its public funding and dominant position.
• Support a diverse regional and local media. We will help to maintain
independent local sources of news and information by enabling
partnerships between TV, radio and newspaper companies to reduce
costs, and by limiting publicly-subsidised competition for paid
advertising from local council free-sheets.

46

your life

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

47

your family. In Britain
today, families come in all
shapes and sizes. Liberal
Democrats believe every
family should get the
support it needs to thrive.

a fair deal for families of every shape and size
In Britain today, families come in all shapes and sizes. Liberal Democrats
believe every family should get the support it needs to thrive, from help
with childcare through to better support for carers and elderly parents.
Liberal Democrats will improve life for your family. On top of our tax cuts to
put £700 in the pockets of millions of low and middle-income earners, we
will allow mums and dads to share parental leave between them so they
can arrange family life in the way that suits them best. We will provide better
support for children at risk and young adults to help them thrive. We will
restore the earnings link for pensions, and offer respite breaks for carers.
And we will protect families from unfair bills.

help for families – right from the start
The first weeks, months and years after a child is born are enormously
important, but the support arrangements are simply too inflexible at the
moment. When a baby is born, the mother gets a year’s leave and the father
gets just two weeks, meaning the mother has to take the lion’s share of the
responsibility, even if their partner would rather share things more equally.
Liberal Democrats will:
• Give fathers the right to time off for ante-natal appointments.
• Allow parents to share the allocation of maternity and paternity leave
between them in whatever way suits them best.
• Protect existing childcare support arrangements until the nation’s
finances can support a longer term solution: a move to 20 hours
free childcare for every child, from the age of 18 months.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

49

• Seek to extend the period of shared parental leave up to 18 months
when resources and economic circumstances allow.
• Support efforts by childcare providers to encourage more men to
work in this hugely important and undervalued profession.
• Extend the right to request flexible working to all employees, making
it easier for grandparents, for example, to take a caring role.

helping families stay strong
Every child deserves a happy life free from poverty and free from fear.
Children face too many difficulties in today’s Britain; the Government is going
to fall far short of its target to cut child poverty, and young people have been
demonised by a generation of politicians more interested in sounding tough
than in offering help. Children are also the main victims of family breakdown.
Liberal Democrats will:
• Maintain the commitment to end child poverty in the UK by 2020.
• Incorporate the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child into UK law,
ending the detention of children for immigration purposes.
• Enhance child protection. We will enforce the publication of an

• Tackle online bullying by backing quick-report buttons on social

anonymised version of Serious Case Reviews to ensure that lessons

networking sites, enabling offensive postings to be speedily removed.

are learned.
• Strengthen the Youth Service by making it a statutory service, and by
• Support the objective of at least a 70 per cent reduction in child

encouraging local authorities to provide youth services in partnership

maltreatment by 2030, promoted by the WAVE trust.

with young people and the voluntary sector.

• Help protect children and young people from developing negative
body images by regulating airbrushing in adverts.

50

• Set the minimum wage at the same level for all workers over 16
(except for those on apprenticeships).

your family

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

51

Pension Credit, though this can only be done when resources allow.

• Introduce a Default Contact Arrangement which would divide
the child’s time between their two parents in the event of family

• Begin a national programme to insulate many more homes paid for by

breakdown, if there is no threat to the safety of the child.

the savings from lower energy bills.
There is a further, serious, long-term crisis facing older people: the

dignity and security in later life

sustainability of the systems for providing long-term care. It is unacceptable
The way older people are treated is the mark of a fair society. Older people

that this challenge has been treated as a political football. A Liberal Democrat

have worked hard and contributed to society for decades; they deserve a

Government would immediately establish an independent commission to

fair deal. Liberal Democrats will increase the inadequate basic state pension

develop future proposals for long-term care that will attract all-party support

and ensure fair treatment for everyone from government, public services and

and so be sustainable. We believe that the eventual solution must be based

business alike.

on the principles of fairness, affordability and sustainability.

That is why Liberal Democrats will:

a fair deal for consumers
• Immediately restore the link between the basic state pension and
earnings. We will uprate the state pension annually by whichever is
the higher of growth in earnings, growth in prices or 2.5 per cent.

While open markets usually deliver opportunity and prosperity, sometimes
markets fail and consumers are badly treated by big business. The banks
have exploited their position of power to impose unfair charges. Energy bills
are far too expensive for many people, and suppliers have not done enough

• Increase the income tax threshold to £10,000, saving most

to protect those who cannot afford to keep warm.

pensioners around £100 a year.

We will:
• Offer a week’s respite for the one million carers who spend 50 hours
• Change the tariffs used by energy supply companies so that the first,

every week looking after a sick relative.

essential, energy you use is the cheapest. We’ll ensure that effective
energy efficiency measures are introduced to keep bills low and that

• Scrap compulsory retirement ages, allowing those who wish to

‘social tariffs’ are available to guarantee the best price for all those in

continue in work to do so.

most need. We will seek to extend protection and support to ‘off-gas• Give you control over your own pension by scrapping the rules that

grid’ consumers.

compel you to buy an annuity when you reach 75.
• Address unfairness in water charges by consulting on the
• In the long term, aim to bring in a Citizen’s Pension that will be paid
to all UK citizens who are long-term residents, set at the level of the

52

your family

implementation of the Walker Review which recommended action to
deal with regional unfairness in water charges.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

53

• Legislate to end unfair bank and financial transaction charges, so

enhanced protection for animals

you cannot be charged more than the costs incurred.
Liberal Democrats believe that ownership and use of animals is a
• Improve access to banking for all with a PostBank, revenues from
which will also help to secure the future of the Post Office.

responsibility that should not be abused.
We will:

• Impose maximum interest rates for credit cards and store cards,
following consultation with the financial industry and consumer groups.
• Introduce a Universal Service Code to secure high-quality customer
service in the private and public sectors, for example by requiring that

• Merge existing quangos to establish an Animal Protection Commission
to investigate abuses, educate the public and enforce the law; it will
also be able to publish reports on its own initiative.
• End testing of household products on animals.

the customer service phone number is free from mobiles and landlines.
• Work for the proper enforcement of regulations for the transportation
• Require a local competition test for all planning applications for new

of live animals across all EU member states.

retail developments and establish a local competition office within the
Office of Fair Trading to investigate anti-competitive practices at a
local and regional level.
• Require airlines to be honest and upfront about pricing, ending the
practice of adding hidden charges.
• Cut rail fares, changing the rules in contracts with Train Operating
Companies so that regulated fares fall behind inflation by 1 per cent
each year, meaning a real-terms cut.
• Make Network Rail refund a third of your ticket price if you have to
take a rail replacement bus service.
• Regulate the parking system to remove unfairness and stop private
sector wheel-clamping.

54

your family

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

55

your world. Britain must
work together with our partners
abroad if we are to have the
best hope of meeting the
challenges the world faces.
We believe in freedom, justice,
prosperity and human rights
for all and will do all we can to
work towards a world where
these hopes become reality.
Above all, climate change is
the greatest challenge facing
this generation.

securing Britain’s future with global action
Liberal Democrats believe that Britain must work together with its partners
abroad if we are to have the best hope of meeting the challenges the world
faces. We believe in freedom, justice, prosperity and human rights for all and
will do all we can to work towards a world where these hopes become reality.
Never has there been such a need for global action. There are only a few
years to take action to stop runaway climate change. The global recession
proved the need for better international regulation of the financial markets.
New security threats are emerging, for which Britain’s armed forces are
not yet fully equipped, whilst terrorists and organised criminals exploit
international networks. The challenge of tackling global poverty remains,
with the Millennium Development Goals still far from being achieved. And
the battle for human rights remains to be fought in many countries.
Liberal Democrats will work through the European Union to deliver a global
deal on climate change. We will transform the armed forces, meeting the
nation’s obligations under the military covenant, and conducting a full
defence review to ensure they are equipped for modern threats. We will
push for better global financial regulation. We will strive for global nuclear
disarmament, showing leadership by committing not to replace the Trident
nuclear weapons system on a like-for-like basis. We will meet the UK’s
obligations to the developing world by committing to spending 0.7 per cent
of GNI on aid. And we will put Britain at the heart of Europe, to ensure we
use our influence to achieve prosperity, security and opportunity for Britain.

tackling climate change
Climate change is the greatest challenge facing this generation. Liberal
Democrats are unwavering in our commitment: runaway climate change
must be stopped, and politicians must follow the science in order to make
that happen.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

57

We will set a target for a zero-carbon Britain that doesn’t contribute at all to

England and Scotland so that they can manufacture offshore wind

global warming – making the British economy carbon-neutral overall by 2050,

turbines and other marine renewable energy equipment.

reducing carbon emissions in the UK by over 40 per cent of 1990 levels by
• Launch an ‘Eco Cash-Back’ scheme, for one year only, which will

2020 as a step on the way.

give you £400 if you install double glazing, replace an old boiler, or
Our response to climate change will give the British people more secure

install micro-generation. If you choose micro-generation, you will be

energy supplies, reduce air pollution and related health costs – and create

able to sell the energy back to the National Grid at a profit, with a

thousands of new jobs.

more attractive feed-in tariff than under current government plans.

Liberal Democrats will:

• Set aside extra money for schools to improve the energy efficiency
of their buildings. They will pay back the loan over time from energy

• Begin a ten-year programme of home insulation, offering a home

savings, creating a rolling fund to help insulate all public buildings.

energy improvement package of up to £10,000 per home, paid for
by the savings from lower energy bills, and make sure every new

• Invest £140 million in a bus scrappage scheme that helps bus

home is fully energy-efficient by improving building regulations.

companies to replace old polluting buses with new low-carbon ones
and creates jobs.

• Set a target for 40 per cent of UK electricity to come from clean,
non-carbon-emitting sources by 2020, rising to 100 per cent by 2050,

• Block any new coal-fired power stations – the most polluting form of

underpinned by guaranteed price support; and ensure that at least

power generation – unless they are accompanied by the highest level

three-quarters of this new renewable energy comes from marine and

of carbon capture and storage facilities.

offshore sources.
• Reject a new generation of nuclear power stations; based on the
• Set out a clear renewables routemap to 2050, covering grid access
and investment in electricity networks, and develop new incentives

evidence nuclear is a far more expensive way of reducing carbon
emissions than promoting energy conservation and renewable energy.

to promote renewable heat.
• Improve energy efficiency in the commercial and public sectors, by
strengthening the Carbon Reduction Commitment Energy Efficiency

• Transform the electricity networks into a dynamic electricity grid
that can better connect and integrate new, clean energy technologies

Scheme and requiring companies and government departments to

particularly through the better use of sub-sea connections, leading to

report on their energy use and set targets for reducing it. We will set

the development of a European Supergrid.

a 30 per cent energy efficiency improvement target for 2020, and
will commit the government to the goals of the 10:10 campaign as
a first step.

• Invest up to £400 million in refurbishing shipyards in the North of

58

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

59

• Work for the adoption of ‘quick win’ measures that could be

leading the fight against climate change

initiated within the next few years such as reducing the use of
Liberal Democrats are committed to securing a legally binding global

hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).

agreement on limiting the increase in global temperatures to below 1.7
degrees Celsius. We believe that such an agreement must be based

At the UN level, we will support the provision of UN Adaptation Funds for

on reducing emissions overall, while equalising emissions between the

developing countries, financed from international emissions markets, such as

developed and developing worlds – the principle of contraction and

a cap-and-trade system for international emissions from aviation and shipping.

convergence. Strong and credible EU ambition, with effective UK leadership,
are essential for achieving a global agreement, so that total greenhouse
gas emissions peak no later than 2015. Liberal Democrats will work within
Europe and internationally to give renewed urgency to global efforts to

protecting the global environment
Humans are living beyond the ability of the planet to support life; more than

combat climate change.

60 per cent of the basic ecosystems that support life on Earth are being
degraded or used unsustainably. Co-ordinated international action and

We will press the EU to:

effective global institutions are necessary to help create a sustainable future
and improve the quality of life of all the world’s citizens.

• Promote the transition to a low-carbon economy in Europe, by
moving unilaterally and immediately to an EU emissions reduction

Liberal Democrats will:

target of 30 per cent by 2020, adopting new long-term targets
and policies for clean energy and energy efficiency; and expand

• Work through the EU to make sure that the environment is fully

investment in energy technology innovation, within Europe and

integrated into the objectives of international institutions such as the

internationally.

World Bank, International Monetary Fund and World Trade Organisation.

• Boost investment in clean energy by reforming the EU emissions

• Work to increase the resourcing of the UN Environment Programme

trading scheme – bringing in a tighter cap on emissions, auctioning

and improve the enforcement of international environmental treaties.

as many allowances as possible, and encouraging other European
countries to increase the use of reserve prices in allowance auctions.

• Protect the world’s forests, not only to reduce carbon emissions but
also to preserve this crucial reservoir of biodiversity. We will argue for

• Engage with major emitters and deepen diplomatic co-operation

60

an international target of zero net deforestation by 2020; support a

between the EU and emerging economies and developing countries,

new system of payments to developing countries to enable them to

provide enhanced financial support for low-carbon solutions and lead

reduce deforestation; and adopt at EU – or, if necessary, at UK – level

international efforts to promote the transfer of technologies that will

a new law making it illegal to import or possess timber produced

help to tackle climate change.

illegally in foreign countries.

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

61

• Work with other countries to develop an international labelling system

consequences of a changing climate. We will ensure that adaptation

for the environmental impact of products, helping consumers choose

and mitigation measures are financed by industrialised nations on top

those with the least impact on resource use and pollution.

of existing aid commitments.
• Prioritise health and education programmes which aim to promote

meeting Britain’s obligations to the developing
world

gender equality, reduce maternal and infant mortality, and restrict the
spread of major diseases like HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria. We will focus
effort on supplying basic needs like clean water.

Liberal Democrats are committed to working towards a world free from
poverty, inequality and injustice and meeting the Millennium Development
Goals is a vital first step. But beyond this we will also ensure that action is

• Support a global fund for social protection to help developing
countries build viable welfare systems.

taken to allow developing nations to grow and to prevent them suffering
unfairly the effects of climate change inflicted by developed countries.

• Push for a renewed international effort on debt and support 100
per cent cancellation of the unpayable debts of the world’s poorest

Liberal Democrats will:

countries. We will also take measures against ‘vulture funds’ and

• Increase the UK’s aid budget to reach the UN target of 0.7 per cent

lobby for similar action at international level.

of GNI by 2013 and enshrine that target in law. We will hold the G8 to
its Gleneagles pledges on aid, including on the 0.7 per cent target.
• Work with other countries to establish new sources of development

equipping Britain’s armed forces for the
21st century

financing, including bringing forward urgent proposals for a financial
transaction tax and a cap-and-trade system for carbon emissions

Modern armed forces face a series of complex challenges. Alongside

from aviation and shipping.

fighting conventional wars, they seek to protect us from the threats of
terrorism, maintain the peace, undertake conflict prevention and help

• Support reform of the global financial institutions such as the World

facilitate development in poorer nations.

Bank and IMF.
The world has changed enormously since the end of the Cold War. New
threats are emerging and yet Britain’s armed forces remain largely equipped

• Ban banks from facilitating the transfer of funds obtained by
corruption. We will crack down on tax havens which allow individuals

to fight the old ones. The Iraq War, and allegations over British complicity

and corporations to avoid paying taxes to developing countries.

in torture and in secret ‘rendition’ flights of terrorist suspects, highlight the
dangers of a subservient relationship with the United States that neglects
Britain’s core values and interests.

• Ensure that the developing world is prepared to deal with the

62

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

63

• With strong Treasury involvement, review all major defence
procurement projects through the SSDR to ensure money is being
spent effectively. We will not purchase tranche 3B of the Eurofighter.
• Rule out the like-for-like replacement of the Trident nuclear weapons
system. At a cost of £100 billion over a lifetime it is unaffordable, and
Britain’s security would be better served by alternatives. We support
multilateral nuclear disarmament and will ensure that the UK plays a
proactive role in the arms reduction talks starting later this year.
• Reinvigorate Franco-British and wider European defence co-operation
to ensure procurement costs are kept low.

a fair deal for our service personnel
The brave men and women of Britain’s armed forces are the most precious
military asset we have. They must be treated fairly, with pay and conditions
that reflect their outstanding commitment to this country, and properly valued
and supported after they leave the services.
Liberal Democrats will put the forces’ welfare first. We will:
• Give a pay rise to the lower ranks so that their pay is brought into line
with the starting salary of their emergency services counterparts.

The threats of tomorrow are likely to be driven by failed states, mass
migration, climate change and regional instability. So we will ensure that

• Double the rate of modernisation of forces’ family homes to ensure

taxpayers’ money is spent more effectively on equipping the forces for

they are fit for heroes.

the tasks of the future, not old Cold War threats. We will:
• Hold an immediate Strategic Security and Defence Review (SSDR)

64

While it is necessary to find resources to support the troops properly, at the

to ensure that Britain deploys its resources to face the most serious

same time fairness requires that we make savings where possible within the

threats to its citizens’ security and well-being, including non-military

defence budget as a whole. We will reduce the number of civilian staff in the

challenges such as climate change.

Ministry of Defence and reduce numbers of top brass officers.

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

65

• Campaign for continuing reform of the EU budget so that money is

putting Britain at the heart of Europe

spent only on the things the EU really needs to do.
Liberal Democrats believe that European co-operation is the best way for
Britain to be strong, safe and influential in the future. We will ensure that

The European Union has evolved significantly since the last public vote

Britain maximises its influence through a strong and positive commitment.

on membership over thirty years ago. Liberal Democrats therefore remain
committed to an in/out referendum the next time a British government signs

But just because Europe is essential, that doesn’t mean the European
Union is perfect. We will continue to campaign for improved accountability,

up for fundamental change in the relationship between the UK and the EU.

efficiency and effectiveness. Working together, the member states of the

We believe that it is in Britain’s long-term interest to be part of the euro.

EU have a better chance of managing the impacts of globalisation, such

But Britain should only join when the economic conditions are right, and in

as cross-border crime and environmental pollution.

the present economic situation, they are not. Britain should join the euro only
if that decision were supported by the people of Britain in a referendum.

Liberal Democrats will:

standing up for liberal values around the world

• Work with Britain’s European neighbours to create thousands of
new jobs by breaking down trade barriers and boosting support for

Liberal Democrats will put British values of fairness and the rule of law

green jobs.

back at the heart of our foreign policy. British people used to be proud of
• Work through the European Union for stricter international regulation

what our country stood for. But Britain’s reputation has been damaged by
unscrupulous arms deals with dictators, allegations of involvement in torture,

of financial services and banking.

and of course the disastrous and illegal invasion of Iraq. We will also give
greater support to conflict prevention – which saves money and saves lives.

• Keep Britain part of international crime-fighting measures such
as the European Arrest Warrant, European Police Office (Europol),

We will:

Eurojust, and the European Criminal Records Information System,
while ensuring high standards of justice.

• Make the EU use its collective weight effectively in other areas of
foreign policy. Britain can have a far stronger voice on relations with

• Keep the pressure on for reform of agricultural subsidies so

Russia, China, Iran and the Middle East peace process when it joins

that farmers, consumers and taxpayers get a fair deal, and the

with the rest of Europe.

environment is protected.
• Be critical supporters of the Afghanistan mission. The military surge
• Fight to stop MEPs having to travel to the Strasbourg Parliament

must be accompanied by a strategy to ensure a more legitimate

every month, wasting €200 million a year.

66

government, tackle corruption and win over moderate elements in

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

67

the insurgency. We will continue to demand a strategy that involves
other players in the region. We believe that a successful strategy will
stabilise Afghanistan enough to allow British troops to come home
during the next Parliament.
• Support the establishment of an International Arms Trade Treaty
to limit the sale of arms to dangerous regimes and work for a full
international ban on cluster munitions. We will ensure that British
arms are not sold to states that would use them for internal
repression. We will require arms brokers to register under a code
of conduct and revoke the licences of those who break the code.
• Support action by the international community to stop Iran obtaining
nuclear weapons. We would follow a diplomatic route of active
engagement, and are ready to back targeted sanctions, but we
oppose military action against Iran and believe those calling for such
action undermine the growing reform movement in Iran.
• Hold a full judicial inquiry into allegations of British complicity in
torture and state kidnapping as part of a process to restore Britain’s
reputation for decency and fairness.
• Remain committed to the search for a peaceful resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A sustainable solution can be reached in
the context of two separate Israeli and Palestinian states, mutually
recognised and internationally accepted within borders which are
secure and based on the situation before the 1967 conflict. We
condemn disproportionate force used by all sides. We believe
Britain and the EU must put pressure on Israel and Egypt to end
the blockade of Gaza.

68

your world

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

69

your community. Liberal
Democrats believe in strong
communities, where local
people can come together
to meet local needs, enjoy a
pleasant local environment,
and feel free from the threat
of crime.

rebuilding security, opportunity, homes and hope
Liberal Democrats believe in strong communities, where local people can
come together to meet local needs, enjoy a pleasant local environment, and
feel free from the threat of crime. We want every community to be safe and
fair, and offer opportunities to people of every background.
Under Labour and Conservative rule, communities have been let down.
Governments have talked tough on crime but failed to take effective action.
Lack of affordable housing has driven many young people out of the
communities where they were born. Public transport is expensive when it is
there at all. Key local services like the Post Office have declined dramatically.
Liberal Democrats will put thousands more police on the beat and make
them work more effectively to cut crime. We value Britain’s open, welcoming
character, and will protect it by changing the immigration system to make it
firm and fair so that people can once again put their faith in it. We will invest
in public transport and cut rail fares, as well as providing more affordable
homes and protecting people from unfair repossessions. We will keep post
offices open, and will protect and restore the natural environment.

cutting crime with more and better police
We will focus on what works to cut crime. We will support more positive
activities for young people to stop them getting involved in a life of crime.
Labour and the Conservatives posture on penalties, which do not deter
criminals. What does deter them is increasing the chances of being caught.
That is why more police are needed on the streets – to provide a longer arm
for the law. And we need to help the police to be more effective at catching
criminals, spend less time on bureaucracy and more time preventing crime,
reassuring the public and helping keep everyone safe.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

71

Liberal Democrats will:

We will:

• Pay for 3,000 more police on the beat, affordable because we are
cutting other spending, such as scrapping pointless ID cards.

• Make hospitals share non-confidential information with the police
so they know where gun and knife crime is happening and can target
stop-and-search in gun and knife crime hot spots.

• Reduce time-wasting bureaucracy at police stations with better
technology that can be deployed on the streets.

• Bring in stop-on-request for night buses. You should be able to
ask the driver to let you off between stops, so you’re as close to

• Give local people a real say over their police force through the direct

home as possible.

election of police authorities. Authorities would still be able to co-opt
extra members to ensure diversity, experience and expertise.

• Require better recording of hate crimes against disabled, homosexual
and transgender people, which are frequently not centrally recorded.

• Give far more power to elected police authorities, including the right
to sack and appoint the Chief Constable, set local policing priorities,
and agree and determine budgets.

• Ensure that financial resources, and police and court time, are not
wasted on the unnecessary prosecution and imprisonment of drug
users and addicts; the focus instead should be on getting addicts

• Strengthen the Youth Service by making it a statutory service, and
encourage local authorities to provide youth services in partnership
with young people and the voluntary sector.
• Reform the police, with a full review of the very restrictive terms and
conditions for police officer employment.
• Turn the National Policing Improvement Agency into a National Crime
Reduction Agency with a wider remit to test what policing techniques
and sentences work and spread best practice across police services
and the criminal justice system.

practical steps to make you safer
We will do all we can to prevent crime with practical measures that we know
will make a difference and keep people safe.

72

your community

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

73

the treatment they need. Police should concentrate their efforts on
organised drug pushers and gangs.

• Give people a direct say in how petty criminals and those who
engage in anti-social behaviour are punished by setting up
Neighbourhood Justice Panels (NJPs), like the one run by Liberal

• Always base drugs policy on independent scientific advice, including
making the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs completely

Democrats in Somerset where 95 per cent of offenders have been
turned away from further crimes.

independent of government.
• Champion restorative justice programmes, like NJPs, which
make offenders confront their behaviour and are more successful

making the justice system work to rehabilitate
criminals and reduce crime
Liberal Democrats believe that once a criminal has been caught, it is vital that
the punishment they are given helps to turn them away from crime, and set

at reducing crime than traditional forms of punishment.

firm but fair immigration system
Britain has always been an open, welcoming country, and thousands of

them back on the straight and narrow.
Too many politicians have talked tough, meting out ever-longer prison
sentences, but doing far too little to tackle reoffending and to stop crime
happening in the first place. As a result, the government is spending more
and more on prisons, but those released from them are as likely as ever to
commit more crimes. We will:

businesses, schools and hospitals in many parts of the country rely on people
who’ve come to live here from overseas. It would be wrong to try and end
immigration completely but we have to manage migration so that it benefits
Britain and is fair for everyone.
The immigration system is in chaos after decades of incompetent

• Make prisoners work and contribute from their prison wages to a
compensation fund for victims. As resources allow, we will increase
the number of hours prisoners spend in education and training.
• Introduce a presumption against short-term sentences of less than

management. The Government has failed to plan properly for new migrants,
making it harder for people to integrate. No-one has any idea how many
people are here illegally, and there aren’t even exit checks at all ports and
airports to ensure that people here on temporary visas go home on time.
We will create a fair system that works and promotes integration. We will:

six months – replaced by rigorously enforced community sentences
which evidence shows are better at cutting reoffending.

• Immediately reintroduce exit checks at all ports and airports.

• Move offenders who are drug addicts or mentally ill into more
appropriate secure accommodation.

74

• Secure Britain’s borders by giving a National Border Force
police powers.

• As a consequence of these changes, be able to cancel the

• Introduce a regional points-based system to ensure that migrants

Government’s billion-pound prison building programme.

can work only where they are needed. We need to enforce any

your community

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

75

immigration system through rigorous checks on businesses and

Alternative systems such as electronic tagging, stringent reporting

a crackdown on rogue employers who profit from illegal labour.

requirements and residence restrictions can be used for adults in
families considered high flight risks.

• Prioritise deportation efforts on criminals, people-traffickers and
other high-priority cases. We will let law-abiding families earn

• End deportations of refugees to countries where they face

citizenship. We will allow people who have been in Britain without

persecution, imprisonment, torture or execution and end the detention

the correct papers for ten years, but speak English, have a clean

of individuals for whom removal is not possible or imminent, except

record and want to live here long-term to earn their citizenship.

where there is a significant risk of absconding.

This route to citizenship will not apply to people arriving after 2010.

better and more affordable homes
a safe haven for those fleeing persecution

In a fair society, everyone should have the right to a decent home, but this

Britain has a responsibility to welcome refugees fleeing wars and persecution
around the world. Liberal Democrats will abide by Britain’s international
obligations and restore confidence in the asylum system by making it firm
and fair.

is not the reality of Britain today. There should be quality social and private
rented housing available for those who need or choose it. And it should be
easy to keep your home warm without harming the environment; British
houses are frequently poorly insulated, wasting money and contributing to
global warming.

We will:

Liberal Democrats will:

• Take responsibility for asylum away from the Home Office and give it
to a wholly independent agency, as has been successful in Canada.
• Push for a co-ordinated EU-wide asylum system to ensure that the
responsibility is fairly shared between member states.

• Make sure that repossession is always the last resort by changing
the powers of the courts.
• Bring 250,000 empty homes back into use with cheap loans and
grants as part of our job creation plan.

• Allow asylum seekers to work, saving taxpayers’ money and allowing
them the dignity of earning their living instead of having to depend on

• Begin a national programme to insulate more homes paid for by the
savings from lower energy bills.

handouts.
• Make sure every new home is fully energy efficient by improving
• End the detention of children in immigration detention centres.

76

your community

building regulations.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

77

• Investigate reforming public sector borrowing requirements to free
councils to borrow money against their assets in order to build a new
generation of council homes, and allow them to keep all the revenue
from these new homes. Over time, we will seek to provide a greater
degree of subsidy as resources allow to increase the number of new
sustainable homes being built.
• Scrap burdensome Home Information Packs, retaining the
requirement for homes to have an energy performance certificate.

public transport you can rely on
Britain needs a well-run, efficient transport system. Public transport is an
important part of a fair society and the best way to cut carbon emissions
from transport without trying to limit people’s opportunities to travel.

• Set up a UK Infrastructure Bank to invest in public transport like
high speed rail.

We want to improve the experience for the traveller and cut carbon
• Give councils greater powers to regulate bus services according

emissions. We will:

to community needs so that local people get a real say over routes
• Switch traffic from road to rail by investing in local rail improvements,

and fares.

such as opening closed rail lines and adding extra tracks, paid for by
• Include the promotion of safer cycling and pedestrian routes in all

cutting the major roads budget.

local transport plans.
• Cut rail fares, changing the contracts with Train Operating Companies
so that regulated fares fall behind inflation by 1 per cent each year,

restricting aviation growth

meaning a real-terms cut.
• Make Network Rail refund a third of your ticket price if you have to

The emissions from rising aviation are a serious problem in the fight against
climate change. But in some more remote parts of the country, flights are

take a rail replacement bus service.

a vital lifeline, and aviation is important for the economy as a whole. Liberal
• Overhaul Network Rail to put the interests of passengers first and
bring it under the Freedom of Information Act to make it more open.

78

your community

Democrats believe that we should do all we can to ensure people use
alternatives where that makes sense.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

79

We will:

a green and pleasant land

• Replace the per-passenger Air Passenger Duty with a per-plane
duty (PPD), so capturing freight movements by air for the first time.

The beauty of Britain’s natural landscape is vital to the quality of life of
those who live there and to visitors. Liberal Democrats will change the way
the environment is protected so everyone has fair access to clean water,

• Introduce an additional, higher rate of PPD on domestic flights for
which alternative and less polluting travel is readily available.

clean air, and open spaces. We’re the only party that takes seriously the
responsibility of protecting our natural inheritance and ensuring access for all.

• Cancel plans for the third runway at Heathrow and any expansion

Liberal Democrats will:

of other airports in the South East.
• Increase the general right of access to the countryside, along the
lines of the model introduced by the Liberal Democrats in Scotland.

a fair deal for motorists

• Abolish the Infrastructure Planning Commission and return decision-

Our planned expansion of public transport will provide much-needed

making, including housing targets, to local people. We will create

alternatives to private cars, and cut carbon emissions. However, in many

a third-party right of appeal in cases where planning decisions go

places there will always be a need for car travel, so we need to ensure that

against locally agreed plans.

it is as environmentally friendly as possible. We will:
• Set targets for ‘zero waste’, aiming to end the use of landfill. That
• Work through the EU for a zero emissions target for all new cars by

means less packaging, more recycling, and a huge increase in
anaerobic digestion to generate energy from food and farm waste.

2040 and extend targets to other vehicles.

We will also improve resource efficiency and reduce waste through
• Undertake preparations for the introduction of a system of road
pricing in a second parliament. Any such system would be revenue-

requiring better design and durability product standards and reducing
excess packaging.

neutral for motorists, with revenue from cars used to abolish Vehicle
Excise Duty and reduce fuel duty, helping those in rural areas who

• Introduce a new strategy to bring the UK back on target to halt the

have no alternatives to road travel. Some of the revenue from lorries

loss of habitats and species and as far as possible restore biodiversity

would be used to fund further extensions of high speed rail through

by 2020.

the UK Infrastructure Bank.
• Protect greenfield land and our built heritage by reducing the cost of
• Introduce a rural fuel discount scheme which would allow a reduced

80

repairs. We will equalise VAT on new build and repair on an overall

rate of fuel duty to be paid in remote rural areas, as is allowed under

revenue-neutral basis. This will also help to reduce the costs of repairs

EU law.

to historic buildings.

your community

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

81

• Make National Parks more democratically accountable, allowing a

• Give local authorities the power to set higher Council Tax rates for
second homes and the option to require specific planning permission

proportion of the Park boards to be elected.

for new second homes, in areas where the number of such homes is
• Create a new designation – similar to Site of Special Scientific Interest

threatening the viability of a community.

status – to protect green areas of particular importance or value to the
community. We will aim to double the UK’s woodland cover by 2050.

• Through our policy on Capital Gains Tax, ensure that those who use

We will stop ‘garden grabbing’ by defining gardens as greenfield sites

second homes as speculative investments will pay tax on enhanced

in planning law so that they cannot so easily be built over.

capital value at the same rate as on earned income, not at 18 per
cent as at present.
• End the post office closure programme to keep post offices open

manage water for everyone

in rural areas where they’re the lynchpin of community life, improve

Britain has real problems in managing its scarce water resources. Some

access to banking and help secure the future of the Post Office

people face devastating floods, while others have drought conditions most

through a PostBank.

summers. We will:
• Promote schemes for affordable homes like equity mortgages and
• Stop major new housing developments in major flood risk areas.

‘Home on the Farm’ which encourage farmers to convert existing
buildings into affordable housing.

• Crack down on waste from the water companies and introduce
compulsory smart meters in areas of shortage.

• Refund VAT to mountain rescue services.

• Introduce landscape-scale planning policies with a specific remit to
restore water channels, rivers and wetlands and reduce flood risk by
properly utilising the natural capacity of the landscape to retain water.

fair trade for British farmers
It is important to Britain’s future security that the country has a sustainable
farming industry. We will build on that strength and ensure that farmers get
the fair deal they deserve, are able to earn a living wage and also help to

a fair deal for the countryside

protect our natural environment and heritage.
Liberal Democrats are proud that we represent a large part of rural Britain.
We believe a fair society is one where people can afford to work and live in
the countryside with accessible public services.

• Create a legal Supermarket Code and a powerful independent
regulator of Britain’s food market.

Liberal Democrats will:

82

Liberal Democrats will:

your community

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

83

Liberal Democrats will support the voluntary sector by:

• Introduce a minimum level for the Single Farm Payment and
concentrate future reductions on the highest claims so that big

• Introducing ‘easy giving accounts’ at publicly-owned banks to allow

landowners get less, and the money goes to working farmers who

people to operate charitable giving accounts alongside their current

need it, not people who farm one field as a hobby.

accounts.

• Use the money freed by our reform to Single Farm Payments to

• Reforming Gift Aid to operate at a single rate of 23 per cent – giving

provide extra support for hill farmers, cheap loans to help farmers

more money to charity while closing down a loophole for higher rate

invest in environmentally friendly biogas digesters and a new Farming

tax payers.

Apprenticeship scheme.
• Reforming the process of criminal record checking so that volunteers
• Work within Europe for further reform of the Common Agricultural
Policy, while continuing direct support for farmers, especially in

need only one record that is portable, rather than multiple checks for
each activity.

upland and less favoured areas. We believe that a greater proportion
of that support should be targeted at conservation, the environment
and tackling climate change, as well as at providing food security
for a rapidly growing world population. Organic and reduced-input
foodstuffs should be encouraged.
• Help consumers to choose foods with the least environmental
impact, through clearer labelling, and work with the EU to make sure
country-of-origin labels identify the source of the products, not where
they are packaged. We will use government procurement policy to
expand the market for sustainable and fair-traded products.

supporting the voluntary sector
As Liberal Democrats, we are committed to handing power back to local
communities. We believe that society is strengthened by communities
coming together and engaging in voluntary activity, which sets people and
neighbourhoods free to tackle local problems.

84

your community

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

85

your say. Liberal
Democrats are the only
party that believes in radical
political reform to reinvent
the way our country is run
and put power back where
it belongs: into the hands
of people.

fair and local politics, protecting your freedom
Liberal Democrats are the only party which believes in radical political reform
to reinvent the way our country is run and put power back where it belongs:
into the hands of people. We want to see a fair and open political system,
with power devolved to all the nations, communities, neighbourhoods and
peoples of Britain.
As the expenses scandal showed, the political system is rotten. Hundreds of
MPs have safe seats where they can ignore their constituents. Party funding
rules mean big donors have huge influence. Power has been concentrated
in Westminster and Whitehall by a succession of governments. And Britain’s
hard-won civil liberties have been eaten away.
Liberal Democrats will do things differently, because we believe that power
should be in the hands of people, not politicians. We will give people a real
say in who governs the country by introducing fair votes. We will stop
big donations and give people the power to sack corrupt MPs. We will
increase the powers of the Welsh Assembly and Scottish Parliament. We
will cut back central government and all the stifling targets that it sets and
make sure local taxes are spent locally. And we will introduce a Freedom
Bill to restore the civil liberties that are so precious to the British character.

fairer politics
Liberal Democrats will transform politics. We want people to be empowered,
knowing the chance to change things in their neighbourhood or in the country
as a whole is in their hands.
Liberal Democrats will:
• Change politics and abolish safe seats by introducing a fair, more

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

87

proportional voting system for MPs. Our preferred Single Transferable
Vote system gives people the choice between candidates as well as
parties. Under the new system, we will be able to reduce the number
of MPs by 150.

cleaner politics
There has been much talk of political reform from the other two parties, but
nothing has happened. They have worked together to block reform, even
voting against a proposal to give people the right to sack corrupt MPs.
Dependent on money from the unions and big business, they have blocked

• Give the right to vote from age 16.

changes to party funding. And determined to protect the secrecy of the
House of Commons, they had to be pushed into revealing the details of MPs’

• Introduce fixed-term parliaments to ensure that the Prime Minister of
the day cannot change the date of an election to suit themselves.

expenses in the first place. Only Liberal Democrats are able to break open
this system and deliver real change.
We will:

• Strengthen the House of Commons to increase accountability. We
will increase Parliamentary scrutiny of the budget and of government

• Give you the right to sack MPs who have broken the rules. We would

appointments and give Parliament control over its own agenda so that

introduce a recall system so that constituents could force a by-

all bills leaving the Commons have been fully debated.

election for any MP found responsible for serious wrongdoing. We are
campaigning for this right of recall to be introduced to the European
Parliament too.

• Replace the House of Lords with a fully-elected second chamber
with considerably fewer members than the current House.

• Get big money out of politics by capping donations at £10,000 and
• Get better politics for less. Liberal Democrats would save this country

limiting spending throughout the electoral cycle.

nearly £2 billion by reforms that cut back waste in central government
• Require all MPs, Lords and parliamentary candidates to be resident,

and the Houses of Parliament.

ordinarily resident and domiciled in Britain for tax.
• Introduce a written constitution. We would give people the power to
determine this constitution in a citizens’ convention, subject to final
approval in a referendum.

• Curb the improper influence of lobbyists by introducing a statutory
register of lobbyists, changing the Ministerial Code so that ministers
and officials are forbidden from meeting MPs on issues where the
MP is paid to lobby, requiring companies to declare how much they

• Strengthen the Data Protection Act and the Office of the Information

88

spend on lobbying in their annual reports, and introducing a statutory

Commissioner, extending Freedom of Information legislation to private

register of interests for parliamentary candidates based on the current

companies delivering monopoly public services such as Network Rail.

Register of Members’ Interests.

your say

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

89

more power for local people
Liberal Democrats believe local people know best about how things should
be done in their area. We will radically decentralise politics so that local
people have the powers and the funding to deliver what they want for their
communities.
Liberal Democrats will:
• Make local government more accountable and responsive to local
people by introducing fair votes for local elections in England.
• Reform local taxation. The Council Tax is an unfair tax. Liberal
Democrats believe that it should be scrapped and replaced with a fair
local tax, based on people’s ability to pay. It is necessary to pilot Local
Income Tax to resolve any practical issues of implementation before
it can be rolled out nationally, so we would invite councils to put
themselves forward to be involved in the piloting phase in the second
year of a Parliament.
• Return business rates to councils and base them on site values, as a
first step towards the radical decentralisation of taxation and spending
powers to local people.
• Review local government finance completely as part of these tax
changes, including reviewing the unfair Housing Revenue Account
system and the mainstreaming of central grants.
• Give people a say in policing and the NHS with elected police
authorities and health boards.
• Scrap nearly £1 billion of central government inspection regimes on
local councils.

90

your say

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

91

• Scrap the Government Offices for the Regions and regional ministers.

revenue to Scotland from the reserves of Registers of Scotland and
from Scottish money paid to OFGEM under the Fossil Fuel Levy as one-

• Implement the Sustainable Communities Act Amendment Bill, which

off payments in the 2011 budget and give control of future revenues to

gives local communities the right to propose actions in their area to

the Scottish Government. This will likely lead to an increase in revenue

improve sustainability.

for Scotland of around £250 million in 2011–12.

a federal Britain

restoring your freedoms

Liberal Democrats have always led arguments for the decentralisation of

Liberal Democrats believe it is an individual’s right to live their lives as they

political power within a federal Britain. While we welcome the progress that

see fit, without discrimination, with personal privacy, and with equal rights

has been made, the job is still far from finished.

before the law.

Liberal Democrats will:

Decades of Labour and Conservative rule have overthrown some of the basic
principles of British justice and turned Britain into a surveillance state.

• Implement the recommendations of the Calman Commission to give
significant new powers and responsibilities to the Scottish Parliament.
• Give the National Assembly primary legislative powers so that it

Liberal Democrats will protect and restore your freedoms. We will:
• Introduce a Freedom Bill. We will regulate CCTV, stop councils from

becomes a true Welsh Parliament. We also support passing on a

spying on people, stop unfair extradition to the US, defend trial by

greater number of responsibilities to the National Assembly.

jury, and stop children being fingerprinted at school without their
parents’ permission.

• Replace the current Barnett formula for allocating funding to the
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish governments with a new needsbased formula, to be agreed by a Finance Commission of the Nations.

• Restore the right to protest by reforming the Public Order Act to
safeguard non-violent protest even if it offends; and restrict the scope
of injunctions issued by vested interests.

• Address the status of England within a federal Britain, through the
Constitutional Convention set up to draft a written constitution for the
UK as a whole.

reviewed publishing through reform of the English and Welsh libel
laws – including by requiring corporations to show damage and

Tensions between Labour and the SNP have undermined the devolved
settlement in Scotland. This has led to unjustified and unnecessary financial
disputes which have locked up money due to Scotland. We will restore

92

• Protect free speech, investigative journalism and academic peer-

your say

prove malice or recklessness, and by providing a robust responsible
journalism defence.

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

93

• Scrap intrusive Identity Cards and have more police instead, and also

• Reduce the maximum period of pre-charge detention to 14 days.

scrap plans for expensive, unnecessary new passports with additional
biometric data.

• Make it easier to prosecute and convict terrorists by allowing

• Halt the increase in unnecessary new offences with the creation of a
‘stop unit’ in the Cabinet Office. Every department in Whitehall would

intercept evidence in court and by making greater use of postcharge questioning.

have to convince this unit of the need for a new offence.
• End plans to store your email and internet records without good
cause.
• Remove innocent people from the police DNA database and stop
storing DNA from innocent people and children in the future, too.
• Ensure that everyone has the same protections under the law by
protecting the Human Rights Act.
• Scrap the intrusive ContactPoint database which is intended to hold
the details of every child in England.

We believe that the best way to combat terrorism is to prosecute
terrorists, not give away hard-won British freedoms. That is why we will:

• Reach out to the communities most at risk of radicalisation to improve
the relationships between them and the police and increase the flow
of intelligence.
• Scrap control orders, which can use secret evidence to place people
under house arrest.

94

your say

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

95

credible and responsible finances
stabilising Britain’s finances to deliver our promises
If we are to be able to deliver the radical changes proposed in this manifesto
as well as restoring the health of the public finances, we must be honest with
people about how these policies will be paid for. That is why we have set
out here how our tax package will be funded, where we intend to increase
spending and where we plan to make savings.
The savings we have identified far outweigh the amount of spending we are
proposing, and it is these savings which will be used to start to reduce the
deficit. All the savings we have identified are either instead of or additional to
proposals the Government has already made. It is our working assumption
that we will start to reduce the deficit from 2011–12 onwards.
The savings identified below are only the start of a programme to tackle the
deficit and in government we will go further, holding a comprehensive review
of all government spending, on which we will consult fully with the public.
This will identify the remaining savings which will need to be made to balance

If we are to be able to deliver the radical
changes proposed in this manifesto as well as

the government’s books. This comprehensive review will not reverse or
undermine any of the spending commitments we make in this manifesto.
Over and above our planned new levy on the profits of banks, we will seek
to eliminate the deficit through spending cuts. If, in order to protect fairness,

restoring the health of the public finances, we

sufficient cuts could not be found, tax rises would be a last resort. While it
will be impossible to remove the Government’s tax rises while the deficit is

must be honest with people about how these

so huge, the increase in National Insurance Contributions is a damaging tax
on jobs and an unfair tax on employees, so when resources allow we would

policies will be paid for.

seek to reverse it.
Following the election of a Liberal Democrat Government, an emergency
budget and interim spending review would be held by no later than the end

96

credible and responsible finances

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

97

of June 2010. This budget and spending review would have four purposes:

and on low-priority spending. It will not reverse or undermine any of the
spending commitments that we make in this manifesto.

• To put in place the necessary tax changes in order to raise the
personal allowance to £10,000 for the start of the financial year

In education, that means that additional funding for schools through the Pupil

2011–12.

Premium will continue to be delivered throughout the next Parliament. Instead
of ring-fencing education, we are doing better than that by bringing in new

• To put in place cuts which could be realised within the financial year,
such as scrapping the Child Trust Fund or restricting tax credits, to
release money for our jobs and infrastructure package.
• Subject to our five economic tests being met, to put into place cuts
for 2011–12 identified in our manifesto.

money to fund the Pupil Premium.
In health, our first priority will continue to be to increase spending in some
parts of the NHS by cutting waste in others. We do not plan to make net cuts
in spending on front-line health services.
The cross-government economies needed to reduce the deficit such as on
pay, pensions, and IT procurement will affect all departments, so it would

• To confirm the departmental spending shifts necessary to deliver our
core manifesto commitments.

simply be dishonest to say that entire departmental budget can be ringfenced from cuts. For example, it is only because we refuse to ring-fence
departments from the search for savings that we have been able to identify

We will establish a Council on Financial Stability, involving representatives

the funds for the Pupil Premium and to protect frontline health services.

of all parties, the Governor of the Bank of England, and the Chair of the
Financial Services Authority. This group would agree the timeframe and

The results of this spending review would be widely consulted on with the

scale of a deficit reduction plan to set the framework (though not the detail)

public sector and general public throughout the end of 2010 and beginning of

for the Comprehensive Spending Review and seek to promote it externally

2011. Based on this consultation a full spending review up to 2013–14 would

and domestically. Any such agreement would be without prejudice to parties

be published alongside the 2011 Budget.

retaining and advocating distinctive views on a wide range of issues, such as
fair taxes and spending priorities.
Throughout the summer and early autumn a Comprehensive Spending
Review of all departments would be conducted with the objective of
identifying the remaining cuts needed to, at a minimum, halve the deficit by
2013–14. A Strategic Security and Defence Review would form part of this
spending review, working within the same financial and time constraints.
This review will focus particularly on savings that can be made across
government – such as on pay, public sector pensions, and IT provision –

98

credible and responsible finances

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

99

tax proposals

spending proposals
£m in projected 2011–12 prices1

£m (in predicted nominal terms)1
2010–11 2011–12 2012–13 2013–14 2014–15

Costs of proposals
1

Raise the personal allowance to £10,000 per person
Total

16,795

Spending commitments
1

Jobs and infrastructure package including:2

1a

Eco cash-back scheme

335

0

0

0

0

1b

Investing in wind energy and other renewables

420

0

0

0

0

1c

Insulating public buildings

1d

Bringing empty homes back into use

1e

Tackling youth unemployment

1f

Bus scrappage scheme

2

Cut class sizes – introducing a pupil premium

3

Scrapping tuition fees3

4

16,795

Revenue generated from proposals
Closing tax loopholes and cutting reliefs that benefit the wealthiest
2

Reform capital gains tax

1,920

3

Restrict pension tax relief to the basic rate

5,455

4

A 1 per cent levy on the value of properties over £2m

1,710

Green taxation
5

Switching from Air Passenger Duty to a per-plane duty

6

A higher per-mile duty charge for non-lifeline domestic flights

3,060
255

400

0

0

0

0

1,165

0

0

0

0

660

95

0

0

0

140

0

0

0

0

0

2,500

2,540

2,590

2,640

600

685

740

1,570

1,765

Restore the pension earnings link

0

0

320

325

330

5

Recruit 3,000 more police officers4

5

50

95

140

185

6

A pay rise and better homes for our troops

0

420

425

430

440

3,730

3,745

4,115

5,050

5,360

3

Anti-avoidance measures
7

Income tax and National Insurance Contributions

2,415

8

Corporation tax

1,460

9

Stamp duty
Total
Contingency fund

Total spending

750
17,025
230

Note: tables may not sum due to rounding
1

100

All figures have been rounded to the nearest £5m

credible and responsible finances

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

101

savings proposals
£m (in predicted nominal terms)1

£m (in predicted nominal terms)1

2010–11 2011–12 2012–13 2013–14 2014–15

2010–11 2011–12 2012–13 2013–14 2014–15

Helping people fairly

Creating a more cost-effective government

7

Reform tax credits

640

1,305

1,300

1,310

1,315

25

Commercialise UK Trade and Investment

0

135

135

140

140

8

Reform winter fuel payments

300

145

60

-15

-70

26

Scrap Eurofighter tranche 3B

0

0

510

510

510

9

Scale back the Homebuy programme

250

255

260

265

270

27

Cut education quangos and administration

0

415

410

420

430

10

Refocus Train to Gain

325

335

340

345

350

28

Prison reform

0

795

735

675

845

11

End government contributions to the Child Trust Fund

395

545

555

565

580

29

Scrap civil service bonuses

0

155

155

160

160

12

Introduce a levy on bank profits

2,005

2,205

2,430

2,670

2,940

30

Cut use of consultants in the public sector

0

180

180

185

190

13

Cut Ministry of Defence administration and top brass

0

205

420

440

460

31

Cut quangos across government

0

225

225

230

235

14

Cut the economic costs of mental health problems
through better treatment

0

425

500

575

605

32

Cut the costs of politics

0

610

620

635

645

15

A cash limit on public sector pay rises of £400 for 2 years 5

0

1,705

3,460

3,525

3,600

Decentralising government
16

Abolish the Government Offices for the Regions

0

90

90

90

95

17

Reform Regional Development Agencies

0

600

610

620

635

18

Cut bureaucracy of local government inspection

0

860

870

890

905

19

End top-down education initiatives

0

335

340

350

355

50

80

110

155

155

220

405

425

400

380

Net increase in devolved administration budgets6
33

The Scottish Parliament7

240

-120

-120

-30

-25

34

The National Assembly for Wales

140

-15

-15

30

40

35

The Northern Ireland Assembly

80

-50

-45

-15

-15

3,730

12,430

15,205

15,435

16,050

Total savings
Net increase in public sector spending

0

-8,680 -11,090 -10,385 -10,685

Creating a freer society
Note: Totals may not sum due to rounding
20

Scrap ID cards

21

Scrap biometric passports

22
23
24

Scrap Intercept Modernisation Programme
Abolish ContactPoint
Maintain the current school leaving age

0
0
0

200
45
0

200
45
35

200
50
35

1

All figures have been rounded to the nearest £5m

2

The jobs package with the exception of parts 1c and 1e is for England only. Barnett consequences for the remainder are accounted for in lines 33 to 35

3

Costs are for England, Barnett consequences for the devolved administrations are accounted for in lines 33 to 35

4

Costs are for England and Wales only, Barnett consquences for Scotland and Northern Ireland are accounted for in lines 33 and 35

5

This proposal is an alternative to the Government’s proposal to cap public sector pay at 1%

6

Scottish and Welsh Liberal Democrats have set out their own budget plans for Scotland and Wales

7

As set out in this manifesto, a Liberal Democrat Government would resolve the disputes and anomalies between the UK and Scottish Governments

200
50
70

over the Registers of Scotland and the Scottish element of the Fossil Fuel Levy, with the consequence of adding up to £250m to the resources controlled
by the Scottish Government in 2011–12.

102

credible and responsible finances

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

103

manifesto 2010 index

Carers ..............................................41, 52

Donations to political parties ...................89

Farming ...................................... 66, 83-84

Child protection ......................................50

Drugs .....................................................74

Fixed-term Parliaments ...........................88

Child Trust Funds ............................16, 102
A

E

Flexible working ................................30, 50

Civil liberties ................................ 87, 93-94

Early Years Foundation Scheme ..............35

Flooding .................................................82

Adult Learning Grant ...............................24

Clamping ................................................54

Easy giving accounts ..............................85

Forces’ pay.............................................65

Aid budget ..............................................62

Class sizes ......................... 10, 33-34, 101

Eco Cash-Back ........................23, 59, 101

Foreign Affairs ................................... 67-68

Airbrushing .............................................50

Climate change..... 8, 11, 57-62, 64, 79, 84

Economy ....................... 10, 24, 17, 21-30,

Foundation Degrees................................24

Air Passenger Duty ...........................14, 80

Coal-fired power stations ........................59

.............................45, 58-60, 83-84, 96-99

Freedom Bill ..................................... 93-94

Air quality................................................42

Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) ...66, 84

Education ............... 10, 24, 33-40, 99, 101

Freedom of Information .....................78, 88

Affordable homes........................ 77-78, 83

Communities .................................... 71-79

– Freedom Act ........................................37

Further Education Colleges ..............36, 39

Afghanistan ...................................... 67-68

Community-owned energy schemes .......28

Educational Standards Authority .............35

Animal Protection Commission ...............55

Competition policy ......................26, 46, 54

Elected Health Boards ................40, 43, 90

G8 ..........................................................62

Animal testing .........................................55

Compulsory Retirement Age ...................52

Electoral reform ................................ 87-90

Gas ........................................................26

Apprenticeships ..........................24, 39, 51

Constitutional reform......................... 87-92

Employment ....9, 22-27, 30, 39-40, 51-52,

Gift Aid ...................................................85

Armed Forces ...................................63, 65

Consumers ..................... 53-54, 62, 66, 84

...........................58-59, 75-76, 84-85, 101

Global temperatures ..............................60

Arms Trade Treaty ...................................68

Control orders.........................................94

Empty homes ...........................23, 77, 101

GP services ............................................43

Asylum ...................................................76

Corporation Tax ....................................100

Energy ........................................................

Green stimulus plan ........................23, 101

Aviation.............................. 9, 61-62, 79-80

Council Tax .......................................83, 90

– Bills ..........................................53, 58, 77

Greenfield land........................................81

B

G

Countryside ...................................... 81-82

– Efficiency ........................... 23, 35, 58-60

Bank charges ................................... 53-54

Creative Enterprise Fund .........................45

– Sustainability ... 23-24, 28, 57-60, 81, 101

Health ..........29, 40-44, 58, 63, 90, 98, 102

Banking Levy ....................................16, 97

Credit cards ............................................54

Enterprise ................................... 22, 25-29

Heathrow ..........................................42, 80

Banks ............10, 16, 21-22, 53, 62, 85, 97

Crime ............................................... 71-74

Environment ............. 10-11, 14, 22-24, 26,

Historic buildings ....................................81

BBC .......................................................46

Criminal record checking ........................85

..................8-29, 35, 42, 53-55, 57-63, 64,

HIV/AIDS ..........................................44, 63

Benefits ...................................... 13, 17-18

Culture.............................................. 44-46

........................ 66, 77-84, 92-93, 100-101

Home Information Packs.........................78

Biometric passports ..........................16, 94

Customer service ....................................54

Equitable Life ..........................................18

Home Office ...........................................76

Ethnic minorities ...............................30, 94

HomeBuy Schemes ........................16, 102

Bullying ............................................35, 51

D

H

Buses ...............................................24, 59

Dartford Crossing ...................................25

EU referendum........................................67

Homophobia.....................................35, 73

Business .................................... 25-28, 82

Defence ............................................ 63-65

Euro .......................................................67

Hospitals .................................... 40-44, 73

– Business growth ..................................21

Deficit reduction ..................... 14-17, 96-99

Eurofighter ................................16, 65, 103

House of Commons Reform ...................88

– Business rates .........................23, 26, 90

Deforestation .........................................61

Europe..... 25, 42, 60-61, 65, 66-67, 84, 89

- Public Accounts Committee .................17

– Business regulation ..............................25

Dementia .......................................... 40-41

Europol ...................................................66

House of Lords Reform ...........................88

– European competition ..........................25

Deportations ..................................... 76-77

Expenses..........................................10, 89

Housing .................... 23, 53, 77-78, 81, 83

C

Devolved administrations .......... 92-92, 103

F

Human rights ......................... 66-68, 93-95

Cancer treatment ....................................40

Disability .....................................18, 30, 73

Fair Pay ..................................................20

Capital Gains Tax ......................14, 83, 100

Discrimination ...................................30, 37

Faith schools ..........................................37

ID cards ..............................16, 72, 94, 102

Carbon capture ......................................59

DNA database ........................................94

Families ............................. 8, 49-55, 76-77

Immigration................................. 50, 75-76

104

index

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

I

105

Income Tax ............... 9, 13-14, 49, 90, 100

Ministry of Defence .........................65, 102

– State Pension .......................... 14, 52-53

Special Educational Needs (SEN) .............. 34

Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) 18, 24-25, 79-80

Motorists ................................................80

Per-Plane Duty (PPD) ................14, 80, 100

Sponsor-Managed Schools....................... 37

Infrastructure Planning Commission ........81

Mountain Rescue Services ......................83

Private Finance Initiative (PFI) ..................24

Sport ....................................................44-46

Police ............... 44, 66, 71-75, 90, 94, 101

Stamp Duty ....................................... 14, 100

International development ........... 57, 62-63

N

International Monetary Fund (IMF) ..... 61-62

National Audit Office ...............................17

Post Office ..................................28, 54, 83

Store Cards ............................................... 54

Internships (Work Placement Scheme) ....24

National Border Force .............................75

PostBank....................................28, 54, 83

Strategic Security & Defence Review ...64-65

Iraq .........................................................67

National Bursary Scheme........................39

Prisons .....................................16, 74, 103

Supermarket Code.................................... 83

Israeli-Palestinian conflict .......................68

National Crime Reduction Agency ...........72

Public borrowing ......................... 14-15, 78

Sustainable energy ........................................

IT procurement .......................................17

National Curriculum ................................36

Public sector pay .... 16, 41, 65, 98-99, 102

............................. 23-24, 28, 58-60, 84, 101

National Grid............................... 23, 58-59

Public sector pensions ................ 17, 98-99

JobCentre Plus .......................................30

National Health Service ......... 33, 40-44, 99

Public services ........................................33

Tax .............................................................

Jobs ........................... 9, 22-27, 30, 39-40,

National Insurance ..........................97, 100

Public spending ..................... 14-15, 96-99

– Business rates .........................23, 26, 90

................51-52, 58-59, 75-76, 84-85, 101

National Lottery ......................................46

Pupil Premium ................................34, 101

– Capital Gains .........................14, 83, 100

Job Creation Package ...........................22

National museums & galleries .................45

Justice ........................................ 68, 74-75

National Parks ........................................82

J

L

National Policing Improvement Agency ...72

Q
Quangos............................. 39-40, 54, 103
R

T

– Corporation .......................................100
– Council Tax ....................................83, 90
– Local Income ......................................90

Landfill ....................................................81

Neighbourhood Justice Panels................17

Rail .............................................................

– Mansion .......................................14, 100

Legal Supermarket Code ........................83

Network Rail ...............................54, 78, 88

– Fares ....................................... 54, 78-79

Tax Avoidance ..........................14, 62, 100

Local Enterprise Funds ...........................22

Night Buses ............................................73

– High Speed .................................... 79-80

Tax Credits ...............................16, 98, 102

Local government ...................................90

Non-Doms ........................................14, 89

Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) .....

Teachers ..................................... 29, 34-38

– Finance ................................................90

Northern Rock ........................................28

.......................................................26, 102

Terrorism ...................................... 63, 94-5

Local Income Tax ....................................90

Nuclear Power ........................................59

Regional Stock Exchanges .....................22

Torture ........................................ 63, 67-68

Renewable energy ......................................

Trade .................................... 61, 66, 83-84

Malaria....................................................63

M

Office of Fair Trading (OFT) ......................54

.......................... 23-24, 28, 58-60, 84, 101

Train Operating Companies ....................78

Mansion Tax ...................................14, 100

Offshore Wind ............................ 23, 58-59

Repossessions .......................................77

Transgender ...........................................73

Manufacturing............................. 22-28, 59

Oil Industry .............................................26

Retail banking .........................................22

Transport .............................. 24, 55, 78-80

Maternity Services ......................40, 42, 49

Olympic & Paralympic Games ................44

Royal Mail ...............................................28

Treasury ................... 10, 24, 17, 21-30, 45,

Media .....................................................46

Operating & Finance Review ...................26

Members of European Parliament (MEPs) ...

Organic...................................................84

.........................................................66, 89

O

P

S

.............................58-60, 65, 83-84, 96-99

Schools ..........................................10, 33-38

Trident ........................................17, 57, 65

Science ....................... 28-29, 35, 36, 39, 57

Tuberculosis (TB) ....................................63

Men .................................................. 49-50

Parental Leave .................................. 49-50

Scottish Parliament ................87, 92-93, 103

Tuition fees .....................................39, 101

Mental health ................ 33, 40-41, 74, 102

Pensions......13-14, 17-18, 52-53, 100-101

Shipyards ............................................ 23, 58

TV & Radio .............................................46

Micro-generation ..............................23, 59

– Citizen’s Pension ............................ 52-53

Single Farm Payment ................................ 84

Middle East....................................... 67-68

– Earnings Link ................................. 52-53

Single Transferable Vote ............................ 88

UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) 18, 24-25, 79-80

Millennium Development Goals .........57, 62

– Pension Credit .................... 17-18, 52-53

Social Care.......................................... 41, 53

UN Adaptation Funds .............................61

Minimum Curriculum Entitlement .............36

– Pension Funds .....................................18

Social Tariffs .............................................. 53

UN Convention on the Rights of the Child...50

Minimum Wage .......................................51

– Public Sector Pensions ............ 17, 98-99

Social Enterprises Bill ................................ 28

UN Environment Programme ..................61

106

index

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

U

107

Unemployment ...........................8, 21, 101
Universal Service Code ...........................54
Universities ................................. 29, 38-39
V
VAT ...................................................81, 83
Voluntary Sector ............. 30, 51, 72, 84-85
Volunteers......................................... 84-85
Voting System................................... 87-90
W
Water Charges........................................53
WAVE Trust.............................................50
Welsh Assembly ................. 87, 92-93, 103
Wheel Clamping .....................................54
Whitehall .....................................28, 37, 94
Winter Fuel Payments ...............18, 49, 102
Women ....................................... 30, 49-52
Work .......................... 9, 22-27, 30, 39-40,
................51-52, 58-59, 75-76, 84-85, 101
– Fair Treatment at Work .........................30
– Work Placement Scheme .....................24
World Bank....................................... 61-62
World Trade Organisation (WTO) .............61
Written Constitution ..........................88, 92
Y
Young People ........... 24, 38, 39, 50-51, 71
Youth Services ..................................51, 72
Z
Zero Carbon Britain ..........................23, 58

108

index

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010

109

Liberal Democrat Manifesto 2010
Liberal Democrats have championed the devolution of powers to Scotland and Wales, and many decisions
made in Westminster now apply to England only. That means that policies in those nations are increasingly
different from those in England – reflecting different choices, priorities and circumstances. Our Scottish and
Welsh Parties make their own policy on those issues. This document sets out our priorities for a Liberal
Democrat Government in Westminster.
Published & promoted by Chris Fox on behalf of the Liberal Democrats, both at 4 Cowley Street, London, SW1P 3NB
Further copies can be obtained from Liberal Democrat Image at www.libdemimage.co.uk and 01252 510005
For information on obtaining copies of this manifesto in alternative formats, please email info@libdems.org.uk
or see www.libdems.org.uk/manifesto
Printed by Sarum Colourview Design by www.apda-london.com ISBN: 978-1-907046-19-3
RRP £5.00 (inc. postage and packing)

