Think Different.
Think Plaid.
2010 Westminster Manifesto

Other formats
You may vary the print online at
www.plaidcymru.org
We will be pleased to provide a copy
of this manifesto on audio cd or
cassette or in large print.
To obtain a copy in another format:
E-mail: polisi@plaidcymru.org
Phone: 029 20 472272

© Plaid Cymru The Party of Wales
ISBN 0-905077-83-0
March 2010

Designed and printed by: blah d blah,
Brunswick House, Riverside Business Park,
Benarth Road, Conwy LL32 8UB.
Promoted by: Plaid Cymru
Ty Gwynfor, Anson Court, Atlantic Wharf, Cardiff, CF10 4AL.

2

3

At a time when people in Wales have never felt so angry
and let down by the same old politics in Westminster, more
and more people are turning to Plaid because they know
that Plaid offers something different. They know that our
party’s values are in tune with theirs. These are the values of
fairness and social justice upon which the politics of modern
Wales were built. Which other party in Wales can say the
same? Labour has slavishly followed Tory policies for 13
years and Cameron has modelled himself and his politics on
Tony Blair.
Neither Labour nor the Tories can be trusted to put the
needs of Welsh communities before the needs of the City of
London. Wales will see massive cuts in public spending as
a result of Labour’s mismanagement of the financial crisis
and neither Labour nor the Tories can be allowed to continue
to wreak havoc on the Welsh economy and undermine
our welfare state. It is now time to ensure that Wales has
a stronger voice in Westminster with more Plaid MPs - to
protect jobs and public services in Wales.
The people of Wales support stronger legislative powers
for the Assembly and an end to the current expensive,
complicated and bureaucratic LCO system as a further
step towards improved Welsh democracy. Plaid calls on
any incoming Westminster government to agree a request
for a referendum on law making powers by the National
Assembly. We expect any new government to recognise the
democratic view of the National Assembly. Plaid Cymru also
believes that, in time, further powers may be transferred to
the National Assembly beginning with the police and criminal
justice, and followed by energy and broadcasting. Plaid
Cymru is committed to working with and for the people of
Wales to create a stronger economy, safer communities, a
more secure world and a solution to the climate crisis.

44

The policies of the Labour government in Westminster are at
the heart of the financial crisis and the recession, which is the
backdrop to this UK General Election. For years, Labour has
tailored its economic policies towards the City of London and
the financial sector at the expense of manufacturing and other
sectors. The Tories supported this approach. Indeed, their
only criticism was that it didn’t kowtow to the City enough.
From day one, when Labour gave the Bank of England control
over inflation, but no targets for employment, the economy
has been geared to financial institutions and not to the public
good. The nadir came when the 70% publicly-owned Royal
Bank of Scotland proposed bonuses of £1.5 billion - enough
to run every hospice in the UK for a whole year - and instead
of facing down the directors of the bank, Labour caved in once
again to bankers’ greed. Plaid Cymru knows that we must
address the fiscal deficit left by Labour. But we must do this
in a way that is fair and just, and which apportions the costs
to those who can afford it, and does not once again exploit
the weakest in society. Our approach to the deficit will be
steered by our principles of fairness and justice and our work
in Westminster will reflect this.
Plaid loves Wales’ communities and cares about creating a
better future for its children. Plaid always stands up for Wales’
interests. So, who will make the biggest difference? Yet
another Labour, Tory or Lib-Dem to toe the London party line?
They are Westminster’s voice in Wales.

Think Different.
Think Plaid.
In what will be a closely fought election
with a hung parliament a real possibility,
Plaid has never before been in such
a strong position to negotiate the best
possible deal for Wales. Only Plaid will be
pushing Wales to the top of the priority list
in London.

Wales’ priorities are Plaid’s priorities

Plaid Cymru MPs will always be Wales’ voice in Westminster.

IEUAN WYN JONES AM
Leader, Plaid Cymru
5

Protecting the Welsh Budget 300 million reasons to
vote Plaid

1
6

The London parties are planning slash and burn cuts to
Wales’ budget and our public services. All this at a time
when experts recognise that Wales is already being
short-changed by the London Government by over £300
million every year.
Our vital frontline health and education services here in
Wales need to be protected from these severe cuts. Only
Plaid will do this. Think about it…
With a hung parliament a real possibility, Plaid has never
before been in such a strong position to defend Wales
from these severe cuts. We will put protecting the Welsh
Budget at the top of our priority list.

7

Plaid’s Living Pension a pension you can live on

2
8

Too many pensioners today have to make the choice
between heating and eating - this cannot be allowed to
continue. Many vulnerable pensioners do not get the
extra pension credits that would keep them above the
poverty line. Plaid’s Living Pension plan would see
them protected.
Starting with the most vulnerable over 80s, our plan
would increase a single person’s pension to at least £130
a week and increase a couple’s pension to £202 a week.
This should then be introduced for all pensioners over
time when public finances allow.
The London-based parties have already decided what’s
important to them - the City, the banks and the votes of
middle England. Plaid has very different priorities - we will
be putting fairness for our pensioners first. Isn’t it only fair
that the very wealthiest in society can and should pay a
little extra to help our most vulnerable? Think about it…

9

Caring for our troops it’s time to bring them home

3
10

Plaid was the only major party to oppose the wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan from the very start. We’re proud that we
stood by our principles back then, and we’re proud of our
ongoing campaign to bring our men and women home
from Afghanistan now.
The Government shamefully neglected our troops
and veterans. They have been prepared to send them
to war, but not properly equip or look after them. Too
many troops and ex-servicemen are suffering long term
physical and mental illnesses as a result of their service.
The Government has a duty to look after them and Plaid
will continue our campaign to give care and support to
soldiers, ex-soldiers and their families.

11

Helping Welsh
businesses to grow

4
12

In order for Wales to succeed, our home-grown
businesses must succeed. Unfortunately, too many
Welsh businesses are finding it difficult to get funding
from banks to help them expand and flourish.
Plaid would set up a special venture capital fund to give
our businesses the funds they need to develop new
ideas, to expand and to create sustainable jobs in all
parts of Wales.
Our businesses and homes also need an IT and
communications infrastructure fit for the 21st century.
Many parts of Wales still cannot access broadband or full
mobile phone coverage - this is holding our businesses
back. We want to prioritise access to broadband with the
aim of providing super-fast broadband to our companies
and homes. We will also campaign for compulsory mobile
network sharing - giving people across Wales improved
mobile coverage.

13

An environmental action plan Wales leading the way

5

The climate crisis represents the greatest threat
to humanity. We must reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions and change the way we produce and use
energy. Plaid’s new environmental plan could help Wales
lead the way in this green revolution, creating thousands
of high-quality green jobs.
Our action plan would bring high-speed electrified
railways to Wales, develop an infrastructure for electric
vehicles and change the national grid to encourage
small-scale energy production across the country.
Investment in community based farming would produce
more locally-grown food. We would roll out a national
programme of home insulation to save energy, and we
would create green electricity through renewable
energy projects.
For Wales to lead this green revolution, we need the tools
to do the job. We want decisions on energy production to
be taken closer to the people - in our National Assembly,
rather than at Westminster.
.

14

15

Proper powers to
make a difference

6
16

We want our National Assembly to have the tools it needs
to do the job - to make a real difference to people’s lives.
To do this Wales needs proper powers.
How can it be right that we have to wait years for
Westminster to agree before we can take action to
improve people’s lives here in Wales? Why should our
carers, our most vulnerable or our children have to wait?
Even though our National Assembly has voted to give the
people of Wales a referendum, we still have to ask the
Westminster Government to agree before it can happen.
That’s why Plaid will call on any incoming Westminster
government to agree to a referendum to make sure that
our National Assembly can get on with the job and make
a difference to people’s everyday lives.

17

Tackling the deficit and
tackling irresponsible banks

7
18

The financial deficit left by Labour must be tackled, but in
the difficult times that lie ahead, we also have a duty to
protect the most vulnerable in society.
To start tackling the deficit we would immediately stop
costly and unnecessary Government spending such
as ID cards and the replacing of defence projects like
Trident. We would ask the very wealthy to pay a little
extra and would tighten the rules to stop the super-rich
from using tax loopholes to avoid paying tax in the UK.
This financial crisis was allowed to happen by a
Government that put the growth of banks and the
financial sector ahead of everything else. Plaid would
reform the banks - separating the high street banks on
which we all rely from the huge investment banks that so
readily gambled with our savings.
Plaid wants to see bank bonuses immediately curbed.

19

Think Reform.
Think Plaid.
The foundations of our economy, the banking system
and the UK parliamentary system have been shaken
to their core over recent months. The impact of these
institutional, political and economic shocks is still being
felt and the need for reform is undisputed. Central to
Plaid Cymru’s campaign is reform of the banking system,
reform of political institutions and reform of structures
which have held Wales back over the decades.

The need for radical reform
It’s ordinary people on average wages who are paying the
human cost of the economic crisis. The Labour government
in Westminster has shown its true colours by providing
guarantees of over £700 billion to bail out the banks, with
inadequate conditions attached. They have rewarded those
very institutions that are to blame for the economic crisis.
Plaid argued that the system should be reformed to benefit
people, not bankers. Over many years Plaid repeatedly
warned about over reliance on the City of London and the
neglect of other industries, particularly manufacturing.
Our economic sustainability was threatened by deregulation
of the banks, by active encouragement of high levels of
personal debt, and by over-reliance on financial services for
tax revenues.

20

Labour didn’t heed the warnings. Plaid Cymru calls for
radical reform and stronger regulation of the financial sector
to prevent reckless behaviour. Commercial and investment
banking must be separated, and systemically important
financial institutions should be barred from proprietary trading
and investing in hedge funds or private equity businesses.
Bankers’ bonuses must be capped and foreign exchange
transactions should be taxed.

Wales is losing out

The need for political reform

As if the economic crisis hasn’t been bad enough for ordinary
people, Wales’ public services are losing out by at least £300
million a year. This gross level of under-funding could reach
£8.5 billion over the next decade. As a result of Labour’s
mismanagement of the economy public finances will face a
squeeze between now and 2014. Calculations based on the
Treasury’s own forecasts show that UK spending departments
face a reduction of 3.2% a year - leading to a total reduction
of £72bn.

The backdrop to the economic and funding crisis is the
parliamentary expenses scandal which revealed the full
extent of corrupt Westminster practices. Public fury at the
complacency of politicians is still strong and trust in the
political class has never been so low. Plaid demands radical
reform of the expenses system with more stringent rules and
checks in place. MPs’ pay, pensions and allowances must be
set by an independent body and the system must be made
fully transparent with regular publication of all expenses.

Based on these figures, the Assembly’s budget faces a
reduction of around £2.8bn. It’s vital that the unfair funding
formula, which governs how much money is spent on Welsh
schools and hospitals, is reformed. Plaid Cymru welcomes the
first report of the Holtham Commission which calls for a new
funding formula based on relative need and for the National
Assembly to have more flexibility in the way it spends its funds.

The Westminster system can learn a lot from the National
Assembly with its transparent, accountable and democratic
processes. Yet more needs to be done. Plaid Cymru has
repeatedly called for electoral reform, for proportional
representation so that every vote counts, for an elected
Second Chamber, for the lowering of the voting age to 16
and for fixed-term parliaments.

To prevent further damage to frontline services, Plaid will
demand the adoption of the Holtham Commission’s interim
recommendations. This would add £300m per annum to
the Assembly budget. The current Labour government in
Westminster has failed to commit to implementing these
recommendations.
Wales’ communities have lost out on significant funding as
a result of the London-centric focus of the 2012 Olympics,
because the present formula has not given Wales the extra
money to which we would be entitled if the Olympics spending
was treated the same way as other spending in England.

21

Think Fairness.
Think Plaid.
Reforming economic and political structures is really
about achieving fairness. Ordinary people have reacted
with disbelief and fury to the parliamentary, banking
and economic crisis because it has revealed a level of
unfairness which verges on the immoral. For Plaid Cymru
fairness is a core value. Basic services, such as health,
education and justice, should be paid for through taxation
and everybody must pay their fair share.

The poor are getting poorer
In 1997, Labour promised an end to child poverty,
inequality and social injustice. Yet the Labour government
in Westminster has failed to close the poverty gap. There
are now 7.5 million working age adults living in poverty (an
increase of 800,000 since 1998) in the UK. Worse still, the
gap between rich and poor continues to widen. This gap is at
its widest where children are concerned.
Plaid Cymru calls on the next Westminster government to
make the abolition of child poverty a top priority. Pensioner
poverty is also endemic with many facing the invidious choice
of eating a meal or heating their homes. Providing a decent
pension is part of the answer to that problem. Plaid Cymru
calls for the introduction of a living pension to protect the
most vulnerable.

22

Many of the most elderly pensioners do not claim pension
credit at all, mistakenly believing it to be a benefit, not an
entitlement. Plaid will press for the introduction of the living
pension during the period of the next parliament for those
aged 80 and over. We would pay for this by limiting income
tax relief on pension contributions to the standard rate. At
present a major proportion of such tax relief goes to those
earning over £150,000 a year. This would be fairer and would
ensure that the highly paid would bear the cost. This would
have a significant impact on pensioner poverty and would take
a significant number of pensioners out of poverty. In the longer
term, when the state of public finances allows, we would lower
the qualifying age.

The need for action

Barriers to work

Those of working age need our help too. While Plaid Cymru
in government has spent millions during this recession to
protect thousands of Welsh jobs, the Labour government in
Westminster has done too little, too late and is now trying
to resume ‘business as usual’. Plaid Cymru recognises that
with more than 121,000 people unemployed in Wales, the
human cost of the recession is still being felt and the impact
on young people - the ‘lost generation’ if action isn’t taken - is
particularly severe.

While Plaid believes that most people who want to work do
work, we recognise that there are some who can’t. The lack
of childcare is one of the biggest barriers to employment
and Plaid is determined to provide affordable and
high-quality childcare for every family in Wales that wants it.

Plaid Cymru believes in redistributive economic policies aimed
at helping low earners, the unemployed and their families to
have an adequate standard of living. We would introduce a
new tax rate of 50% on those earning over £100,000. In order
to help poorer families, Plaid would also raise the personal tax
allowance by £1,000. This would take 1 million people on low
incomes out of the income tax net altogether.
Plaid Cymru calls for a Maximum Wage. Linking minimum and
maximum earnings would begin to close the massive pay gap
which has grown even further out of control under Labour in
Westminster. We also call for the rate of Capital Gains Tax to
be increased to the marginal rate of income tax being paid.

Plaid Cymru is opposed to Labour’s Welfare Reform Act.
This Act links benefit payments to work and threatens
benefit sanctions for those unable to meet unfair and
unrealistic government demands. Plaid believes that these
proposals will simply result in a vicious cycle of people who
live between in-work and out-of-work poverty.
We oppose the use of punitive sanctions for the one million
people claiming incapacity benefit who suffer severe
mental health problems. We also oppose the privatisation
of back-to-work services and the compulsory drug testing
of claimants. Unemployed people must be supported into
work, consistent with their abilities, capacity and their
individual circumstances.

The tax changes that we propose are sufficient to fund our
proposed spending.

23

Fairness in the workplace

Investing in innovation

Educating the nation

Plaid calls for stringent implementation of labour laws for all
workers, including enforcement of the legal minimum wage to
address the iniquity of poor pay and unfair working conditions.
We have consistently called on the Labour government in
Westminster to adopt European standards on employment
rights and will continue to call for a binding Charter of
Fundamental Rights. Recognising that we also need to ensure
equality in the workplace, Plaid Cymru calls for all companies
with more than 500 members of staff to be obliged to have
employee representation on the Board of Directors.

It has become clear that sustainable economic development
will depend on new, innovative technologies. Plaid has
repeatedly called for a substantial investment programme
to address the climate crisis and generate sustainable jobs.
Whilst we welcome the Welsh Assembly Government’s Green
Jobs Strategy, more needs to be done. Plaid Cymru has
always supported the ability to vary business taxes in order to
boost business.

The future of our economy depends on a well-educated,
highly-skilled workforce. As education is largely a devolved
issue, Wales has been able to forge its own path in
determining its priorities. Giving our children a strong start
in life is vital, not only for their own future, but for the future
of Wales.

We support a National Welsh Medium Education Strategy.
Every child in Wales has the right to education in the Welsh
language. Pupils with Special Educational Needs should
also have access to provision in Welsh. We support a
Welsh-language Coleg Ffederal with an independent stream
of funding and an independent student register.

We are committed to an early years’ curriculum - the
Foundation Phase - which emphasises learning through play,
and we call for a study into the feasibility of providing every
infant school child in Wales with free school meals. We want
to develop and enhance the Welsh Baccalaureate and we
will continue to oppose Foundation Schools on principle.
The Government in London must not try and impose
Foundation Schools in Wales against the wishes of our
own elected Assembly.

We will also continue to campaign for a National Veterinary
School for Wales.

We will continue to fight for justice and compensation for
former coal miners suffering from respiratory diseases and we
call for the extension of the enhanced miners’ compensation
provisions to slate quarry workers.

We believe that Wales is an aspiring nation of entrepreneurs.
Plaid Cymru is fully committed to encouraging the
development of community-owned social enterprises and
welcomes the Rowlands review into the provision of growth
capital. That review recognised that a vibrant SME sector
is vital for economic growth. There is a lack of provision for
companies looking for between £2 and £10 million in capital
(though we believe that in Wales there may be a need for a
lower threshold).
The review also concluded that the present financial market
and its institutions do not meet this need and that further
intervention is needed. We believe that this should be in the
form of a venture capital fund for Wales established with the
help of the Welsh Assembly Government (but independent
of it). This fund could raise capital and deliver investment
through a co-investment model, with approved private
sector partners.

24

We will not support any further increases in tuition fees, and
will seek the abolition of tuition fees as and when public
finances allow.

Plaid calls for a review of the National Curriculum for Wales
to consider the subjects and methods through which they are
taught. We support the introduction of a compulsory modern
language GCSE in secondary schools.
We will campaign for a National Citizenship Service for Wales,
a voluntary scheme in which young people may complete a
year of volunteer work before leaving education. We believe
that this will help young people develop a sense of public duty.

25

Think Well-being.
Think Plaid.
Plaid Cymru is committed to securing a healthier nation
through a high-quality, publicly-funded NHS, free for all
at the point of delivery. Plaid’s vision is of health services
rooted in the heart of our communities, a health service
that is as much about promoting well-being as it is about
tackling illness. We want a health service that will ensure
that the people of Wales, whatever their background and
wherever they live, have the opportunity to lead healthy
and happy lives.
Now is the time to invest in that healthy future. Already,
as part of the One Wales government, Plaid is delivering
many of the health priorities it has advocated for years.
There are many policy priorities, however, that cannot
be implemented in full given the weakness of the current
devolution settlement.

Plaid’s prescriptions for health

Good health starts at home.

Plaid Cymru calls for all powers over mental health to
be devolved to the National Assembly. We reaffirm our
commitment to Community Wellbeing Centres across Wales
and evening surgeries for GPs. We demand devolved powers
to legislate on other health-related matters such as sun beds,
cigarette vending machines and the regulation of alcohol
pricing. We also call for responsibility for the provision of
ambulance services to be passed to the Local Health Boards
in place of the current expensive and bureaucratic National
Ambulance Service.

Where we live has a huge impact on our health and well-being
as well as our access to healthcare, education, training and
jobs. Plaid Cymru believes that everybody should be able to
obtain an affordable home of decent quality in the area where
they want to live. We are already working hard to deliver this
within the Welsh Assembly Government, but we also need a
strong Plaid Cymru voice in Westminster on housing-related
issues that are not devolved.

Plaid Cymru remains committed to free care provision for
older and disabled people and we call for the transfer to the
National Assembly of the necessary powers. We oppose
means-tested allowances and we will campaign to abolish the
distinction between nursing and personal care.
Family Health Clinics must be adequately financed and young
people provided with accessible sexual health advice.

Plaid Cymru calls for changes to the way that social housing is
financed so that Treasury rules on borrowing no longer stand
in the way of Local Authorities that want to build and maintain
new social housing. We believe that Housing Associations and
Local Authorities should work on a level playing field.
We are committed to bringing empty properties back into use
so that we make more housing available and renew our towns
and communities. Plaid Cymru believes that there should be
an immediate cut in VAT to 5% on all home maintenance,
repairs and improvements. Plaid Cymru understands the
difficulties that first-time buyers face in getting onto the first
rung of the housing ladder. To address this, Plaid calls for a
moratorium on stamp duty for first-time buyers.

Fuelling the nation

We all have a responsibility to improve energy efficiency
within our homes and to use more renewable energy. This is
not only in response to climate change but also to tackle fuel
poverty so that everybody can afford to keep warm in their
homes. This problem is increasing sharply with a quarter
of all households in Wales now experiencing fuel poverty.
The average energy bill is now more than double that of five
years ago, and in Wales, consumers pay approximately 5%
more than do consumers in the rest of the UK.
In contrast, the profits of energy companies have risen
dramatically. Plaid will continue to campaign for a windfall
tax on energy companies to help pay for grants for
insulation for lower income families. We will also work to
ensure that the new feed-in tariffs encourage communityscale renewable energy.

Plaid Cymru believes that primary legislation relating to
housing should now be devolved to the National Assembly for
Wales, bringing decision making closer to the people

26

27

Safe as houses?

Justice as Fairness

People need to feel safe at home and in their community. Plaid
Cymru believes that there are a number of reasons underlying
the causes of crime. We believe that greater support should be
provided for victims and witnesses to help people feel safer in
their communities. We are committed to restorative justice and
community sentencing where appropriate.

We will continue to demand control over our crime and justice
system in its entirety, including the police force and youth
justice, so that Wales can fully tackle the complex problems
of individual and community safety and rehabilitation. Instead
of investing in unnecessary ‘Titan’ prisons, we call for the
building of juvenile and women’s prisons and we fully support
a prison in north Wales despite the Labour government in
Westminster’s decision to drop plans for a site.

We call for a national community safety strategy for Wales,
more drug rehabilitation places and programmes, drug
and alcohol education in every school in Wales and better
amenities for young people in their communities. We call for
a minimum price per unit of alcohol, initially set at 50p, along
with stricter controls on alcohol advertising and marketing.
We support the development of a National Violence Against
Women Prevention Strategy for Wales. It will address all forms
of violence including domestic abuse, trafficking, ‘women
with no recourse to public funds’, forced marriage and sexual
assault. Plaid Cymru calls for more resources for Rape Crisis
Centres, of which there is only one in Wales, and also for
Sexual Assault Referral Centres, of which there are only five
in Wales.

28

We will also continue to campaign for bilingual juries and a
separate legal jurisdiction for Wales. Plaid Cymru will continue
to fight for civil liberties and will oppose any further attempts
by a future Westminster government to curtail free speech.
We will continue to oppose legislation to make possible
secret inquests, Internet monitoring, wasteful ID cards, the
national DNA identity register and longer pre-charge periods
of detention for suspects

Think Sustainability.
Think Plaid.
The climate crisis is one of the most pressing political
challenges we face. The future of our planet depends on
urgent action to reduce emissions and the adoption of
a different, more sustainable lifestyle. Plaid Cymru puts
the environmental crisis and sustainable development at
the heart of its policies. The world faces a triple crunch of
peak oil, climate crisis and global economic recession.

We will continue to oppose the use of waste incinerators
and support binding targets for waste prevention. We
support recycling targets of 80% of domestic waste by
2020 and the introduction of a higher landfill tax. We will
campaign for changes in public procurement legislation so
that Local Authorities can favour materials from recycled
and local sources.

Reducing our carbon footprint

More and more people want to grow their own food yet
there are long waiting lists in a number of areas. The 1908
Allotment Act provides for people to petition their Local
Authority for allotment land. Most Authorities routinely
refuse such applications. To remedy this, Plaid Cymru calls
for reform of the Act to meet Welsh demand.

The Welsh Assembly government has committed Wales to
annual carbon reduction-equivalent emissions of 3% per year
by 2011 in areas of devolved competence. We now recognise
that climate change is more severe than previously realised.
The National Assembly has agreed, with cross party support,
to reduce emissions by 40% below 1990 levels by 2020. Plaid
will work to ensure that this decision is turned into meaningful
and effective action to achieve the full reduction, and calls on
the government in Westminster to follow Wales’ lead.

29

Feeding the nation
Plaid Cymru believes that farming is central to the prosperity
and sustainability of our rural communities. The industry
has some difficult challenges ahead, not least increasing
production to satisfy growing global demand for food, while
reducing its environmental footprint. With the likelihood of
traditional European subsidies changing, agriculture will need
to become more market driven and profitable. The Welsh
Assembly Government is working closely with the industry to
achieve this, and by doing so, to increase the prosperity of
family farms across Wales.
Welsh agriculture also needs a strong Plaid Cymru voice in
Westminster to promote the interests of Wales - for instance
to reaffirm our commitment to keeping Wales GM-free. We
also need to ensure that Wales’ interests are at the heart of
the UK’s negotiations with other EU Member States when the
Common Agricultural Policy is reviewed in 2013.
We need to make sure the new ‘Supermarket Ombudsman’,
which Plaid has long called for, has the teeth it needs so that
Welsh producers get a fair deal. We need changes to UK food
labelling legislation so that consumers have clear information
on ‘place of farming’. Plaid Cymru will also oppose a UK
Treasury livestock tax being imposed on Welsh farmers.

Ensuring that Wales has a voice is
also central to energy priorities
Plaid Cymru demands the full devolution of all powers over
energy policy to the National Assembly. Wales could be selfsustaining in energy generation by 2020.
Wales must take full advantage of our renewable energy
resources. We will support micro generation and other
small-scale sustainable power generation schemes, including
tidal, wave-power, on-shore and offshore wind, hydro
and biomass. The move to large-scale renewable energy
production in Wales must be speeded up if we are to achieve
the required outcome in the necessary timetable.
We are, however, completely opposed to the undemocratic
Infrastructure Planning Commission. The future energy profile
of Wales should be decided democratically, and by people
who are accountable to the people of Wales.
We call for emission performance standards for all new power
stations and we reaffirm our opposition to the construction of
any new nuclear power stations in Wales. We call for research
into the creation of a European Smart Power Grid for the
sharing of renewable energies across Europe.

Sustainable Travel
We cannot tackle climate change without considering the
impact of transport. The UK will not achieve its target of 80%
carbon emission reductions by 2050 if air travel continues
to expand. Plaid Cymru opposes plans for a third runway
at Heathrow, which is another example of incoherent and
divided thinking by the Labour government in Westminster.
We call for the removal of hidden subsidies for air travel and
the introduction of tax on aviation fuel. The revenue generated
should be invested in improving the public transport network
and in reducing rail and long-distance bus fares substantially.
Plaid Cymru has demonstrated in government that it is
committed to building an all-Wales, modern, integrated public
transport system. We recognise that the railway system will
never achieve our environmental objectives unless it is both
cheap and attractive to use, and that will not happen without
a significant and ongoing commitment of public funds. We
reiterate our call for the railway system to be brought back into
public ownership.

Connectivity - connecting
Wales to the world
Of course, connectivity is about more than connecting
people to places. It’s also about ensuring that Wales is
connected to the rest of the world in the digital sense. New
technology must be harnessed to provide Wales with a
strong voice on the global stage and to ensure that there are
no communication ‘not spots’ in Wales.
Many parts of Wales still cannot access broadband or
can only access it at extremely slow speeds. Plaid Cymru
believes that future broadband development should be
based on a minimum public service obligation for all,
currently proposed at 2Mbps. Plaid Cymru calls for research
into the construction of a super-fast national broadband
network for Wales, ending decades of under-investment
in our public communications services. We also support
compulsory network sharing between mobile phone and
broadband operators.

With much of the responsibility for the rail network still resting
at Westminster, the UK Government must play its part too.
We need cheaper and faster high-speed electric rail links
from Wales to mainland Europe. We call for a review of the
National Assembly’s powers over freight transport and a
phased transfer of heavy freight from road to rail.
Because Plaid Cymru recognises that in many parts of Wales
road travel is unavoidable, we are committed to upgrading key
major road routes, especially north-south links.

30

31

Think Global.
Think Plaid.

Plaid Cymru is proud of Wales’ unique heritage and as an
internationalist party wants the nation to be able to play
its part in the global community. Recognising that many
of the challenges facing the world don’t respect national
boundaries, Plaid believes that Wales has a lot to offer the
world in cultural, economic and social terms.

Our national treasure
The Welsh language belongs to all the people of Wales,
wherever they live, whichever language they speak. The
right place to legislate on the Welsh language is the National
Assembly for Wales and all powers relating to the language
should be devolved. Plaid Cymru will legislate to give official
status to Welsh, create rights for individuals to receive services
through the medium of Welsh, and create the post of Language
Commissioner to ensure that the interests of Welsh language
speakers are proactively safeguarded and promoted.
Plaid Cymru is committed to protecting high-quality regional
broadcasting and media recognising the importance of
plurality in news and TV programming in Wales. We will
continue the campaign to increase S4C funding to support the
development of digital services. We also call for more help for
the Welsh-language print media.

32

A confident nation

A just world

Plaid Cymru is committed to an independent Wales as a
full member of the European Union. We will continue to
support further democratic reform of the EU. We demand
increased representation for Wales in the EU. This includes
a fair number of MEPs for Wales, a European Parliament
office in Wales, a rotating European Commissioner and most
importantly, a vote for Wales in the Council of Ministers.

Plaid Cymru MPs voted against the illegal war in Iraq and the
war in Afghanistan. Plaid supports a phased exit strategy from
Afghanistan by the end of 2011 at the latest. While they are
there, the young men and women in the armed forces should
be protected and cared for.

As a welcoming nation, Plaid Cymru recognises the invaluable
contribution that migrants have made to Wales. Our civic
nationalism celebrates tolerance, mutual understanding
and difference. We condemn the point-scoring used by
other parties and the pandering to unfounded xenophobic
prejudices in the debate on immigration. Plaid Cymru also
supports the right of asylum seekers to work in the UK while
they wait for status decisions to be made and we call for the
speeding up of the unnecessarily complicated asylum system.
We condemn the practice of housing recently-arrived asylum
seekers, especially children, in “detention” or “removal”
centres as punitive and cruel.

Plaid Cymru calls for an immediate Military Well-Being Act
to promote and safeguard the physical and mental health
and wellbeing of military personnel. This includes ongoing
after-care, legal advice and counselling support for veterans
and their families, as well as improved compensation,
housing, healthcare and treatment for alcohol and drug abuse.
We call for the wasteful Trident renewal programme (which is
likely to cost upwards of £76 billion) to be abandoned, and for
the cancellation of the Typhoon Eurofighter contracts. We also
call for the cancellation of the two new aircraft carriers which
are currently planned (a project which is likely to cost upwards
of £10 billion).
We will continue to press for an ethical foreign policy which
emphasises conflict prevention and we call for real, effective
action to curtail the international arms trade. This should
include a new treaty and a binding code of conduct restricting
arms exports, as well as a complete ban on land mines,
cluster bombs and white phosphorous, and an immediate
international ban on the military use of uranium.

We support the campaign to establish a Wales Peace
Institute to help us play our part in promoting peace and
justice throughout the world. Plaid Cymru has a number
of concerns about the proposed development of the St.
Athan Defence Training College. We will continue to seek
reassurances that this large sum of public money will
produce the promised high-quality jobs and boost to the
local economy.
We will continue to campaign for the rights of minority
nations and minority language speakers in Europe and in
future possible accession countries such as Turkey.
Plaid will press the UK government to honour the
commitment to delivering 0.7% of GDP as international
aid and we will continue to campaign for the cancellation
of developing countries’ unaffordable debts. We call for
increased resources for the UN Adaptation Fund to help
developing countries adapt to the effects of climate change.
We demand equal representation for developing countries
in the decision-making process on climate change action.
We also reaffirm our support for the international
Fair Trade movement.
We insist on essential governance reform of international
organisations such as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund to ensure that they take into account human
rights, the environment and workers’ rights.

33

Don’t just read about it - act on it.
Listening to politicians from the London parties criticising
and attacking each other, it’s sometimes easy to believe
that politics and elections are more about personalities than
choices. That isn’t the way Plaid sees it. We believe that each
election is about making a choice about the kind of future that
we want to see, for Wales and for the world. We also believe
that we can choose a different future. Things really don’t have
to be this way.

We want an education system which gives all of our people the
skills which they want and need. We want a health service built
around the needs of our people and communities and we want
both services to be available to all, free at the point of use.

Plaid Cymru is a party which cares passionately about Wales
and her people. Everything that we say and do is geared to
that end. We have a vision for the sort of nation Wales
can become.

In short, we want a great deal. We have huge ambitions for
Wales, but we believe that they are entirely achievable. We
hope that you will share our vision and our belief in the ability
of our nation to realise it.

We want change. We want a society built around the needs of
the people, not the needs of the political elite or the bankers
and speculators.

This election is about choices, and it is the people of Wales
who will be making those choices. There is a real and genuine
alternative to the future being offered by the London parties,
and we have articulated that future in this manifesto. You can
choose that alternative future, or you can choose more of the
same. Which is it to be?

We want financial fairness for Wales, both in the way we are
funded and the way we use the funding available to us. We
want a system of taxation and benefits which means that
those who can afford to pay do, and those who need help
receive it.

We want a Wales which is confident about her place in the
world, and in which all her people feel a sense of belonging
and ownership.

We want to build our economy around industries which use
the earth’s resources in a sustainable way. We want to reduce
Wales’ carbon footprint by taking action as a government and
as individuals.

34

Photographs in this document are of models and any views implied may not be those of the people featured

