Elect a local
champion.

Manifesto 2010

Manifesto 2010

Contents
Introduction	

4

Scotland	needs	champions	

6

More	Nats,	Less	Cuts		

8

Winning	a	better	deal		
for	Scotland	

11

Building	a	new	partnership	

17

Supporting	the	Scottish		
Government	

23

PaGe	3

Introduction

This election is about ensuring a strong team of Scottish MPs in the
House of Commons - a team of SNP MPs. Local champions, who will be
there working hard for you, your community and Scotland.
The	London	parties	all	offer	the	same	thing	-	the	wrong	priorities	for	our	
nation.	They	aren’t	talking	about	the	issues	that	matter	most	to	people	or	
offering	the	solutions	and	ideas	that	will	improve	life	here	in	Scotland.	
For	them	the	needs	of	our	families,	neighbours	and	communities	are	a	
second	thought.	Scotland	deserves	better.
The	SNP	cares	about	Scottish	success.	We	are	Scotland’s	Party	and	here	at	
home,	and	in	the	parliament	in	London	we	offer	Scotland	a	stronger	voice.	
When	the	SNP	is	successful,	London	listens.	
So	at	this	election,	with	your	help,	we	can	secure	big	gains	for	the	people	
of	Scotland.	Our	plans	would	mean	60,000	new	green	jobs	by	2020;	a	
fair	deal	for	pensioners	with	pensions	rising	in	line	with	earnings	and	a	
guarantee	to	protect	free	personal	care	and	concessionary	travel;	and	
a	new	phase	of	capital	acceleration	so	we	can	create	almost	5,000	new	
jobs	this	year.	We	will	press	for	the	scrapping	of	Trident	nuclear	missiles	
and	a	halt	to	their	replacement,	demand	a	fair	fuel	regulator	to	protect	
motorists	from	soaring	fuel	prices	and	work	to	make	sure	Scotland	is	part	
of	the	first	phase	of	the	UK	high	speed	rail	network.
and	we	can	make	sure	Scotland’s	communities	are	heard.	That	is	
important	on	polling	day,	and	even	more	important	once	the	votes	are	
counted	and	decisions	are	being	taken	at	Westminster.	Scotland’s	voice	
must	be	heard,	because	if	it	isn’t,	the	people	of	Scotland	will	lose	out.
as	a	party	and	as	Scotland’s	government,	our	focus	is	first	and	foremost	
on	winning	the	best	deal	for	Scotland.	We	are	ambitious	for	you	and	
your	family	and	confident	in	Scotland’s	ability	to	succeed,	now	and	with	
PaGe	4

Manifesto 2010

independence.	We	are	focused	more	than	ever	on	building	the	stronger,	
more	successful	nation	we	know	Scotland	can	be.	This	manifesto	sets	out	
many	of	the	steps	we	can	take	here	in	Scotland,	and	with	hard-working	
Scottish	MPs	in	the	House	of	Commons,	to	protect	what	really	matters.
We	are	working	hard	for	economic	recovery	and	new	jobs	and	
opportunities	for	families	and	communities.	However	the	London	parties’	
proposed	cuts	pose	a	threat	to	this	recovery.	That	is	why	Scotland	needs	
champions	and	why	our	local	communities	need	champions	too.	at	this	
election,	more	votes	means	more	Nats,	and	more	Nats	means	less	cuts.	
Local	services	and	recovery	can	and	must	be	protected.
These	are	challenging	times,	and	as	Scotland’s	Government	and	Scotland’s	
Party	in	the	House	of	Commons,	we	are	determined	to	do	all	we	can	to	
make	our	nation	healthier,	safer,	fairer,	greener,	smarter	and	wealthier.
These	elections	are	about	giving	you	and	the	people	of	Scotland	the	
strongest	possible	voice	in	the	decisions	that	will	be	taken	in	London.	It	
is	about	choosing	the	strongest	local	representation.	It	is	about	electing	
local	champions	-	MPs	who	will	stand	up	for	the	people	they	represent.	
Our	MPs	will	speak	up	for	Scottish	values	and	argue	to	scrap	the	£5	
billion	ID	card	project,	the	£100	billion	replacement	for	Trident,	the	£100	
million	House	of	Lords	and	the	near	£10	million	Scotland	Office	so	we	
can	instead	protect	the	vital	public	services	we	all	rely	on	and	make	the	
investment	we	need	for	economic	recovery.	Our	MPs	will	work	to	ensure	
that	Scots	get	the	opportunity	to	be	consulted	on	our	own	constitutional	
future.	Incredibly,	the	Labour	Party	now	propose	an	early	referendum	on	
the	alternative	Vote	and	the	House	of	Lords	while	they	seek	to	block	the	
Scottish	Parliament	holding	a	referendum	on	Independence.
Running	through	this	manifesto	is	the	SNP	vision	of	a	new	future	for	
Scotland,	independent,	socially	just	and	economically	secure.	The	
real	alternative	to	the	discredited	Westminster	system	is	a	fresh,	
independent	future	for	our	nation.
elections	are	important.	Too	often	it	is	the	hard-working	people	and	
families	who	are	left	out	and	forgotten.	So	if	you	care	about	Scotland	and	
your	community,	don’t	just	vote	for	a	politician,	elect	a	local	champion.

Alex Salmond SNP	Leader
PaGe	5

Scotland needs champions

Your vote on May 6th is important. Our nation needs a strong team of
Scottish MPs working for our communities in the House of Commons.
SNP MPs who will be local and national champions - working hard for
people in all parts of Scotland.
We	need	national	champions	who	will	stand	up	for	Scotland’s	interests	
and	oppose	the	London	parties’	agenda	of	cuts	that	will	be	so	damaging	
to	Scotland’s	recovery	and	vital	local	services.
The	Labour	Party	now	threatens	cuts	that	will	be	‘deeper	and	tougher’	
than	under	Margaret	Thatcher	and	the	Tories	plan	an	additional	£1	
billion	cut	on	Scotland	each	year	by	ripping	up	the	current	funding	deal	
without	the	consent	of	the	Scottish	Government	or	Scottish	people.
PaGe	6

Manifesto 2010

The	Tory	and	Labour	agenda	is	effectively	the	same	–	the	wrong	cuts	at	
the	wrong	time.	Their	actions	will	threaten	recovery	and	cost	Scottish	
jobs.	Scotland	needs	SNP	MPs	in	the	House	of	Commons	who	can	make	
sure	our	nation	is	protected.	
and	we	need	local	champions,	because	at	the	moment	Westminster	isn’t	
working	for	the	communities	and	people	of	Scotland.	The	system	is	
failing	our	nation.
every	SNP	candidate	will	sign	a	pledge	of	accessibility,	accountability	
and	openness	–	it	will	be	their	Community	Commitment.	It	will	be	
their	guarantee	-	their	contract	with	the	voters	-	and	it	will	set	the	
standard	for	their	work	on	behalf	of	the	people	they	represent.	It	will	
include	guarantees	on	publication	of	expenses,	on	regular	constituency	
surgeries	and	consultation	with	voters	and	community	groups.
The	London	parties	are	part	of	the	same	metropolitan	political	machine	
–	a	machine	that	leaves	the	ordinary	men	and	women	of	our	country	on	
the	outside.	at	this	election	we	don’t	need	more	of	the	same.	Instead	we	
can	choose	strong	local	champions.	SNP	candidates	who	will	stand	up	for	
local	interests	and	work	to	protect	vital	local	services.	
SNP	MPs	will	take	forward	the	issues	that	matter	most	in	local	
communities,	whether	that	is	creating	jobs,	securing	lower	fuel	prices,	
protecting	local	post	offices	or	ensuring	safety	barriers	are	installed	on	
level	crossings.
SNP	MPs	will	make	the	case	for	a	fairer	voting	system	and	for	reform	of	
Westminster	expenses	so	that	it	matches	the	higher	standards	of	the	
Scottish	Parliament.
The	more	SNP	MPs	elected,	the	stronger	Scotland’s	voice	will	be	in	the	
House	of	Commons	and	the	better	we	can	protect	Scotland’s	people	and	
Scotland’s	interests.	
We	are	the	only	Party	that	will	put	Scottish	interests	first.	SNP	MPs	will	
provide	strong	local	representation	–	working	for	Scotland	and	working	
for	you.	

PaGe	7

More Nats, Less Cuts

In this time of fragile recovery from recession it is more important
than ever to have SNP MPs working in the House of Commons to
protect public spending and investment in recovery so we can create
jobs for communities across Scotland.
We	believe	that	now	is	the	wrong	time	to	
We
cut	public	spending	because	cuts	will	put	
the	recovery	at	risk.	The	Tory	plans	to	
cut	spending	this	year	are	dangerous	and	
economically	unsound.
We	believe	that,	like	virtually	every	other	
country	across	the	world,	we	need	further	
economic	stimulus.	economic	growth	is	
essential	for	job	creation	and	is	the	key	to	recovery	in	government	
revenues.	Cutting	off	stimulus	at	this	stage	simply	doesn’t	make	sense	
and	yet	that	is	what	Labour,	the	Tories	and	the	Liberals	want	to	do.
While	other	nations	are	acting	now	to	stimulate	their	economies,	the	
UK	financial	plans	-	according	to	the	Treasury	-	mean	that	spending	cuts	
will	take	1%	off	economic	growth	in	2010.	
and	for	Scotland,	stopping	the	stimulus	will	see	£400	million	removed	
from	our	budget	this	year,	a	decision	that	will	cost	5,000	Scottish	jobs.
Failing	to	support	economic	recovery	now	will	also	make	it	more	difficult	
to	reduce	the	UK’s	debt	burden	in	future.	Today,	the	UK	has	a	huge	and	
growing	debt	burden	as	a	result	of	Labour	economic	mismanagement.	
The	way	to	recover	that	position	is	to	recapture	some	of	the	lost	growth	
of	the	last	two	years.	each	fall	of	1%	in	growth	costs	the	exchequer	£20	
billion	but	each	rise	gains	a	similar	amount.	Therefore	we	must	sustain	
the	economic	stimulus	to	promote	recovery	this	coming	year.
We	must	not	raise	taxes	on	job	creation	since	these	will	lower	
employment	and	revenue	in	the	future.
We	must	recycle	government	efficiencies	to	protect	frontline	services.
We	should	cut	the	projects	that	the	country	doesn’t	need	and	can	no	
longer	afford	such	as	Trident,	ID	cards	and	deep	storage	nuclear	dumps.	

PaGe	8

Manifesto 2010

We	must	not	allow	the	UK	parties	to	jeopardise	Scotland’s	recovery.		
We	must	protect	Scotland	from	Labour’s	plan	for	‘deeper	and	tougher’	
cuts	than	Margaret	Thatcher	and	from	the	Tories’	plan	to	impose	a	£1	
billion	cut	targeted	specifically	at	Scotland.

Protecting the things that matter
We	believe	different	choices	on	cuts	must	be	made.	Instead	of	cutting	
spending	on	the	things	that	really	matter	like	recovery	and	local	
services	–	as	the	London	parties	propose	–	we	believe	the	axe	should	
fall	elsewhere.	We	should	protect	spending	on	health,	education	and	
jobs	and	instead	cut	projects	like	the	£100	billion	replacement	for	
Trident,	the	current	nuclear	deterrent,	the	UK’s	deep	depository	for	
nuclear	waste	and	the	remnants	of	the	ID	card	programme.	
Savings	should	also	be	made	by	scrapping	the	House	of	Lords	and	the	
unnecessary	Scotland	Office.	We	believe	that	the	Scottish	Government	
should	deal	directly	with	the	relevant	UK	departments	on	issues	like	
employment	and	the	economy,	rather	than	having	to	go	through	a	
department	that	has	no	direct	influence	on	the	decisions	that	need	to	be	
taken.	The	Scotland	Office	currently	costs	us	almost	£10m.	If	we	abolish	
it,	we	could	direct	the	savings	towards	worthwhile	investment	in	
Scotland	and	in	services	that	will	improve	the	quality	of	life	for	ordinary	
Scots.	
and	the	UK	should	follow	the	example	of	the	Scottish	Government	and	
make	real	efficiency	savings	so	resources	can	be	directed	towards	
the	frontline.	So	far	in	Scotland	we	have	delivered	the	same	amount	
of	efficiencies	in	one	year	as	the	UK	has	managed	in	two,	with	these	
Scottish	savings	invested	in	record	high	spending	on	health	and	schools.	
as	we	move	forward	senior	salaries	in	government	will	be	frozen,	
including	for	ministers.	We	believe	those	who	earn	most	in	the	public	
sector	should	play	their	part	in	these	difficult	times,	while	those	on	
lowest	wages	continue	to	get	pay	increases.
There	will	be	a	25%	reduction	in	the	number	of	quangos	saving	£40	
million	each	year,	a	50%	reduction	in	the	Scottish	government	marketing	
budget	and	a	5%	reduction	in	administration	costs.	

PaGe	9

More Nats, Less Cuts

as	a	result	of	SNP	action	in	government	we	are	saving	£160m	through	
smarter	public	procurement,	£82m	by	managing	our	assets	better	and	
£12m	through	the	sharing	of	back	office	services	across	the	public	
sector.
These	are	the	right	choices	–	cut	Trident,	spend	less	on	government	and	
on	PR	so	we	can	create	jobs	and	protect	the	services	that	are	such	an	
essential	part	of	Scottish	society.	
at	this	election	the	choice	is	clear.	Only	the	SNP	is	working	to	protect	
recovery	and	investment	in	public	services	here	in	Scotland.	More	votes	
means	more	Nats,	and	more	Nats	means	less	cuts.

PaGe	10

Winning a better deal for Scotland

SNP MPs in the House of Commons will work hard to win the best deal
for Scotland and our communities. We will work in partnership with
our allies in Plaid Cymru to secure important gains for the people of
our nations as set out in the 4Wales, 4 Scotland agreement.
We	will	not	enter	any	form	of	coalition	agreement	with	the	London	
parties.	Instead,	as	we	know	from	the	experience	of	governing	in	
Scotland	with	a	balanced	Scottish	Parliament,	we	will	seek	to	secure	key	
concessions	for	Scotland	on	a	vote	by	vote,	issue	by	issue	basis.
There	is	much	we	can	achieve	for	our	nation	and	for	our	communities:
Fair funding
New,	fairer	funding	arrangements,	including	fiscal	autonomy	for	
Scotland,	will	be	one	of	our	key	priorities,	allowing	us	to	do	more	to	
support	jobs	and	create	a	more	competitive	business	environment.	
Given	the	economic	challenges	we	face,	this	is	crucial	for	Scotland’s	
future	success.
It	would	give	us	the	ability	to	lower	corporation	tax.	This	is	a	policy	
lever	that	has	been	used	in	similar	nations	across	europe	and	the	result	
has	been	higher	levels	of	economic	growth,	more	high-paid	jobs	and	
higher	tax	revenues.	It	is	a	win-win	policy	that	Scotland	should	be	able	
to	implement.	
and	similarly,	it	would	enable	us	to	save	a	proportion	of	our	growing	
energy	wealth	–	from	oil	and	gas	today	and	renewable	energy	in	the	
future	-	in	an	energy	Fund.	This	fund	would	act	like	a	national	savings	
account	–	or	as	the	Norwegians	describe	their	fund,	a	national	pension	
fund	-	and	would	deliver	greater	financial	security	and	an	income	for	
Scotland	well	into	the	future.
In	the	meantime,	we	will	press	for	the	fair	application	of	the	Barnett	
formula.	That	includes	a	new	independent	appeal	process	so	that	we	
move	away	from	the	current	position	where	the	UK	is	judge	and	jury	in	
any	disputes	between	the	devolved	governments	and	Whitehall.	That	
would	stop	the	Treasury	from	subverting	the	Barnett	formula.	
For	example,	we	believe	that	funding	for	regeneration	around	the	
London	Olympic	site	should	be	subject	to	the	Barnett	Formula,	which	
would	mean	that	Scotland	gets	additional	resources	worth	at	least		
£165	million	to	support	regeneration	investment	across	Scotland.	
PaGe	11

Winning a better deal for Scotland

This	approach	is	supported	by	the	governments	in	Wales	and	Northern	
Ireland	because	the	current	arrangements	are	designed	by	the	
government	in	London	to	by-pass	the	long	established	rules.	
The	SNP	will	also	continue	to	lead	cross-party	calls	for	the	return	of	
£150	million	lottery	funds	diverted	from	Scotland	to	help	fund	the	
London	2012	games.	The	return	of	the	diverted	funds	would	turn	a	good	
legacy	for	the	2014	Glasgow	Commonwealth	Games	into	a	great	legacy.	
Focus on jobs and recovery
We	will	urge	a	further	acceleration	of	capital	spending,	a	move	that	
would	support	almost	5,000	Scottish	jobs	and	provide	much	needed	
economic	stimulus	in	the	short	term.	This	should	be	a	central	part	of	any	
post-election	Budget	or	spending	review	and	will	help	us	strengthen	and	
support	Scotland’s	economic	recovery.
and	SNP	MPs	will	join	with	the	Scottish	Government	to	press	for	
Scotland	to	have	the	ability	to	borrow,	just	as	Northern	Ireland	does,	to	
allow	additional	investment	in	infrastructure	and	jobs.	It	makes	sense	
for	us	to	be	able	to	spread	the	cost	of	new	roads	or	hospitals	over	a	
longer	period,	in	the	same	way	as	families	do	with	their	mortgage.	It	
would	mean	thousands	of	additional	Scottish	jobs.
We	will	look	to	improve	current	efforts	on	employment.	We	will	argue	
for	Scotland	to	have	greater	responsibility	for	employment	policy	so	we	
can	bring	together	the	work	of	Job	Centres	and	our	skills	agency	to	make	
sure	local	communities	benefit	from	skills	and	employment	support	
that	is	fully	co-ordinated.	That	simple	move	would	enhance	the	existing	
partnership	arrangements,	reduce	bureaucracy	and	overlap	and	mean	
more	time	and	resources	are	available	to	help	people	into	work.
Protecting local services and the most vulnerable
In	the	next	Parliament	public	spending	will	be	squeezed	and	we	will	
argue	that	action	to	reduce	the	deficit	is	based	on	what	is	important	to	
people	here	in	Scotland.	Cuts	should	be	made	to	the	things	that	matter	
least	so	we	can	continue	investment	in	vital	local	services.
One	of	our	top	priorities	in	the	new	Parliament	is	to	ensure	a	fair	deal	
for	Scotland’s	pensioners.	SNP	MPs	will	vote	in	the	House	of	Commons	
for	the	restoration	of	the	link	between	the	State	Pension	and	earnings,	
bringing	a	much	needed	£110	million	boost	for	Scottish	pensioners.		

PaGe	12

Manifesto 2010

Such	a	move	will	help	many	of	the	most	vulnerable	Scottish	pensioners.
We	are	fully	committed	to	fair	and	effective	policies	such	as	the	
concessionary	travel	scheme	for	older	Scots	and	free	personal	care.	We	
will	protect	these	from	the	spending	cuts	that	will	be	imposed	by	the	
next	London	government.	
and	we	believe	Scots	must	not	lose	out	as	a	result	of	policy	decisions	
for	england.	That	means	there	should	be	no	new	taxes	or	contributions,	
or	changes	to	attendance	allowance	or	Carer’s	allowance	that	will	
impact	on	Scots,	to	pay	for	reform	of	care	for	the	elderly	down	south.	
We	will	argue	for	a	fair	deal	for	motorists.	There	should	be	a	fair	fuel	
regulator	so	that	when	oil	prices	increase	motorists	are	not	doubly	
punished	with	soaring	taxes	and	prices	at	the	pumps.	and	the	UK	should	
also	adopt	the	same	sort	of	tax	derogation	on	fuel	sold	in	our	island	and	
remote	communities	as	exists	elsewhere	in	the	eU.	
and	we	will	work	to	protect	postal	services	across	Scotland	by	opposing	
any	changes	to	the	Royal	Mail	that	will	weaken	the	universal	delivery	
obligation.	We	support	the	creation	of	a	post	bank	to	enable	Post	Offices	
to	provide	a	greater	range	of	banking	services	for	many	of	our	smaller	
towns	and	rural	areas.
We	believe	that	those	who	have	put	their	lives	at	risk	fighting	for	our	
country	should	be	entitled	not	only	to	our	respect	but	more	importantly	
to	our	support	and	as	a	result	of	representations	from	SNP	MPs,	the	
Scottish	Government	is	now	exploring	options	for	the	introduction	of	a	
Veterans	Card	in	Scotland	to	improve	access	to	services	for	Scotland’s	
veterans.
SNP	MPs	will	work	to	put	renewed	focus	on	efforts	to	narrow	the	gap	
between	the	haves	and	have	nots	in	our	society	–	generating	wealth	so	
we	can	improve	the	quality	of	life	for	all	and	end	the	scandal	of	child	and	
pensioner	poverty.	The	benefits	system	should	be	designed	to	provide	
incentives	for	work,	rather	than	barriers	to	work.	It	should	also	more	
closely	meet	Scottish	needs	and	circumstances	and	be	easier	to	access.	
We	will	press	the	UK	government	to	investigate	new	approaches	such	
as	a	maximum	combined	withdrawal	rate	for	benefits	and	also	call	for	
reform	to	the	hugely	problematic	employment	Support	allowance	and	
changes	to	the	system	of	cold	weather	payments	so	it	more	closely	

PaGe	13

Winning a better deal for Scotland

reflects	Scottish	needs	and	circumstances	and	increases	support	for	
individuals	in	Scotland.	and	we	believe	the	minimum	wage	should	
increase	in	line	with	earnings.	
Action to help the green economy
Scotland	has	enormous	green	energy	potential	and	the	SNP	is	
determined	to	make	the	most	of	this	opportunity	for	our	nation.	We	
need	to	maximise	investment	in	the	research	and	infrastructure	so	we	
can	turn	potential	today	into	tens	of	thousands	of	green	jobs	tomorrow.
Our	aim	is	to	increase	low	carbon	employment	in	Scotland	by	60,000	
by	2020	as	part	of	our	low	carbon	strategy,	with	renewable	energy	
supporting	26,000	jobs,	emerging	low	carbon	technologies	a	further	
26,000	and	environmental	management	8,000	more.
at	Westminster	we	will	be	demanding	the	release	of	the	Fossil	Fuel	
Levy	money	so	it	can	be	used	to	deliver	£200	million	new	investment	in	
renewables.	This	fund	can	only	be	used	for	investment	in	green	energy	
projects	yet	the	London	Treasury	still	prevents	that	money	from	being	
put	to	good	use	to	create	employment	in	communities	across	Scotland.
and	we	will	work	to	remove	obstacles	to	further	investment	in	wave,	
tidal	and	wind	generation	in	Scotland	by	ending	the	discriminatory	
transmission	charging	regime	–	a	system	that	sees	Scottish	generators	
paying	far	more	to	connect	to	the	grid	than	companies	elsewhere	in	
the	UK.	a	generator	in	Scotland	can	pay	£20	per	kilowatt	hour	while	
companies	in	the	south	of	england	receive	a	subsidy.	The	SNP	has	
worked	with	the	Scottish	energy	companies	to	produce	an	alternative	to	
the	current	discredited	system	and	remove	what	has	been	described	by	
one	as	a	‘major	barrier	to	investment’.
Taking	forward	the	green	economy	is	of	course	about	more	than	
renewables	and	that’s	why	Scotland	must	be	part	of	the	first	phase	of	
the	proposed	UK	high	speed	rail	network.	This	move	will	boost	business	
and	reduce	carbon	emissions	by	delivering	an	effective	alternative	
to	domestic	flights.	It	will	take	30	years	for	high	speed	rail	to	reach	
Scotland	under	Labour	or	Tory	plans	and	this	is	not	acceptable.
Support for business growth
Our	efforts	will	be	focused	on	promoting	Scottish	economic	recovery.	We	
will	work	to	ensure	that	growth	industries	in	Scotland,	like	the	games	

PaGe	14

Manifesto 2010

industry,	are	given	the	same	sort	of	support	as	in	competitor	countries	
and	for	incentives	for	further	investment	and	exploration	in	the	North	
Sea,	helping	extend	the	lifetime	of	this	valuable	Scottish	resource.
	
We	will	also	oppose	Labour’s	proposed	hike	in	National	Insurance	
because,	as	a	tax	on	jobs,	it	will	hinder	the	effort	to	get	people	back	
to	work.	It	will	also	cost	public	services	at	a	time	when	budgets	are	
already	tight.	The	bill	for	the	NHS	alone	will	be	£36m.	The	total	jobs	cost	
for	Scotland	will	be	10,000.	If	tax	rises	are	required	then	they	should	be	
progressive	and	fair	and	open	and	honest.
We	believe	the	banks	should	be	doing	more	to	support	rather	than	
inhibit	growing	businesses.	The	UK	government	should	use	its	influence	
as	a	controlling	shareholder	in	some	of	the	UK’s	major	banks	to	ensure	
increased	access	to	credit.	It	is	right	that	action	is	taken	to	reform	the	
banking	sector.	We	support	calls	for	an	international	bank	tax.	and	we	
will	support	steps	to	limit	bonus	payments	as	part	of	wider	regulatory	
reform	that	encourages	a	return	to	prudent	banking	–	banking	that	
protects	customers	and	taxpayers	from	the	casino	style	risk	taking	that	
characterised	some	investment	banking	before	the	credit	crunch.	
We	will	provide	a	strong	voice	for	our	fishing	and	agriculture	sectors,	
holding	the	UK	government	to	account	while	they	represent	these	
economically	important	industries	in	europe.	and,	to	protect	the	
incomes	of	many	of	our	farm	businesses	we	will	oppose	UK	plans	on	
CaP	reform,	which	would	see	the	removal	of	the	important	First	Pillar	
funding.	
Standing up for what is right
We	will	continue	to	lead	the	campaign	for	the	scrapping	of	the	UK’s	
nuclear	deterrent.	We,	like	the	majority	of	Scots,	do	not	want	the	
obscenity	of	weapons	of	mass	destruction	on	Scotland’s	shores.	We	have	
no	doubt	that	our	nation	would	prefer	to	see	resources	spent	properly	
equipping	our	troops	in	afghanistan	and	invested	in	jobs,	on	meeting	
our	international	development	commitments	and	on	building	a	fairer,	
stronger	society	here	at	home	rather	than	on	nuclear	missiles	that	can	
wipe	out	half	the	planet.
The	early	years	are	the	most	important	and	the	SNP	will	support	moves	
to	extend	paternity	leave	–	it	is	right	that	both	parents	are	able	to	take	
adequate	leave	in	the	first	months	of	their	child’s	life.

PaGe	15

Winning a better deal for Scotland

We	will	press	the	UK	government	to	meet	its	international	obligations	
including	a	continued	commitment	to	meet	the	UN	target	of	0.7%	of	
national	wealth	devoted	to	overseas	development.	The	SNP	believes	
international	development	must	be	a	priority.	as	the	Scottish	
Government	since	2007,	we	doubled	Scotland’s	international	aid	budget	
and	are	building	strong	links	with	developing	nations	such	as	Malawi.	
We	will	oppose	plans	to	repeal	the	Human	Rights	act.	Our	MPs	will	
continue	to	support	the	efforts	of	organisations	like	the	equality	and	
Human	Rights	Commission	and	the	Scottish	Human	Rights	Commission,	
and	stand	up	for	what	is	right,	arguing	for	example	for	the	Home	
Office	to	end	the	practice	of	holding	the	children	of	asylum	seekers	in	
detention	centres.

PaGe	16

Building a new partnership

Every survey of opinion tells us that people across Scotland want to
see the Scottish Parliament take on more responsibilities – for our
representatives here in Scotland to have the ability to do more to
make our nation more successful.
The	more	responsibilities	our	parliament	has,	the	more	we	can	
achieve	and	the	more	effectively	we	can	respond	to	local	concerns	and	
community	campaigns.	If	the	decisions	are	taken	here	in	Scotland	it	is	
much	more	difficult	for	politicians	to	ignore	local	issues	because	those	
issues	are	much	closer	to	home.	
The	SNP	wants	Scotland	to	enjoy	the	full	responsibilities	of	
independence.	We	believe	the	300-year	old	political	Union	is	no	longer	
fit	for	purpose.	It	was	never	designed	for	the	21st	century	world.	It’s	
time	for	a	new	partnership	on	our	isles	–	a	social	union	that	ensures	
Scotland	and	england	are	equal	nations	–	friends	and	partners	-	both	
free	to	make	our	own	choices.	
Independence	will	create	a	new,	more	appropriate	relationship.	It	will	
allow	us	to	work	together	when	that	makes	sense,	and	enable	Scotland	
to	take	all	the	decisions	we	need	to	build	prosperity	and	make	the	most	
of	the	many	opportunities	that	exist	for	our	nation.
People	recognise	the	areas	where	Scotland	today	is	held	back	by	
decisions	taken	in	London	and	there	is	a	growing	belief	that	we	could	
achieve	so	much	more	if	we	were	able	to	take	these	decisions	ourselves.
Some	believe	that	the	Parliament	should	only	take	on	a	small	number	
of	new	responsibilities,	including	those	set	out	by	the	recent	Calman	
Commission	on	Scottish	Devolution:	on	air	weapons,	drink	driving	
and	speed	limits.	The	SNP	supports	the	transfer	of	these	additional	
responsibilities	and	in	government	has	published	the	legislation	that	
could	make	this	happen	quickly.	The	Scottish	Parliament	has	backed	
early	transfer	but	the	Labour	government	in	London	said	no.
Others	believe	the	Parliament	can	best	serve	Scotland	by	taking	on	
substantial	new	responsibilities	including	over	our	economy	and	public	
finances.	This	would	enable	Scotland	to	respond	more	effectively	to	
economic	pressures,	and	speed	our	nation’s	recovery.	and,	of	course,	
with	independence,	Scotland	would	be	able	to	achieve	even	more.	

PaGe	17

Building a new partnership

With	independence	we	will	be	able	to	deliver	a	more	successful	
Scotland,	with	greater	prosperity	for	the	people	of	our	nation.
With	independence,	we	can	remove	the	obscenity	of	nuclear	weapons	
from	Scotland’s	shores	and	represent	ourselves	at	the	top	table	in	
europe.
and	with	independence	we	will	be	able	to	build	on	our	efforts	to	support	
young	families,	with	our	ambition	to	match	the	universal	childcare	
support	available	in	similar	nations	elsewhere	in	europe.
The	SNP	believes	that	the	people	of	Scotland	should	have	their	
say	on	the	future	of	our	nation	in	a	referendum	on	extending	the	
responsibilities	of	the	Scottish	Parliament.	That	is	why	we	are	taking	
forward	a	Referendum	Bill	in	the	Scottish	Parliament	this	year.	
and	because	we	recognise	that	a	majority	of	Scots	want	the	Scottish	
Parliament	to	be	able	to	do	more,	there	will	be	an	opportunity	during	
the	Bill	process	for	one	or	more	of	the	opposition	parties	in	the	Scottish	
Parliament	to	bring	forward	a	proposal	for	further	devolution	to	be	
included	in	the	referendum.	This	would	allow	people	to	have	their	say	on	
the	status	quo	and	on	extending	the	responsibilities	of	the	parliament	
to	allow	for	further	devolution	and	to	allow	Scotland	to	become	
independent.
	
The	referendum	is	all	about	giving	the	people	of	Scotland	the	
opportunity	to	have	their	say	on	our	nation’s	future	–	to	determine	the	
sorts	of	responsibilities	our	parliament	and	government	should	have	in	
the	years	ahead.
The	SNP	is	proud	to	champion	the	people’s	right	to	speak	on	this	issue.	
The	other	parties	support	a	referendum	in	Wales	on	more	powers	and	
the	Labour	government	in	London	even	supports	a	referendum	on	the	
alternative	Vote	and	reform	of	the	House	of	Lords,	and	yet	they	reject	a	
referendum	for	Scotland.	That	shows	how	little	they	trust	the	people	of	
our	nation.
The	SNP	has	long	campaigned	for	fair	votes	and	the	removal	of	
anachronisms	like	the	unelected	House	of	Lords.	and	we	will	continue	to	
press	for	the	abolition	of	the	act	of	Settlement.

PaGe	18

Manifesto 2010

The	world	is	full	of	opportunities	for	Scotland	and	our	people.	There	are	
so	many	ways	we	can	improve	our	relations	with	our	neighbours	and	
with	peoples	across	the	globe	–	with	the	benefit	enjoyed	here	at	home.	
and	we	can	see	Scotland’s	values	and	priorities	reflected	in	the	actions	
we	take	on	the	international	stage.
The	SNP	believes	that	Scotland	will	be	best	served	when	we	speak	for	
ourselves	to	the	world.	Then	we	can	choose	to	promote	trade,	culture,	
links	with	the	diaspora	and	development	as	our	top	priorities	and	
deliver	a	overseas	service	designed	to	meet	these	needs.	We	could	
become	a	voice	for	peace	and	progress	in	the	world.
We	believe	a	new	approach	is	needed	in	the	way	Scotland	is	represented	
in	the	eU.	Independence	would	give	us	our	own	seat	at	the	top	table	of	
europe,	and	until	then,	we	will	argue	for	Scotland	to	have	an	enhanced	
role	within	the	UK,	including	leading	on	issues	such	as	fisheries	where	
Scotland	has	the	majority	UK	interest.
and	we	will	argue	for	Scotland	to	take	responsibility	for	immigration	
so	that	we	can	develop	a	system	here	at	home	that	more	closely	meets	
our	needs.	an	‘earned	citizenship’	system,	similar	to	those	in	Canada	or	
australia,	would	allow	Scotland	to	attract	high-skill	immigrants	who	can	
add	to	the	strength	of	our	economy	and	help	deliver	growing	prosperity	
for	the	whole	nation.
Scotland	can	be	proud	of	its	place	in	the	world.	Scottish	troops	have	
served	in	operations	around	the	globe	with	distinction.	Scottish	aid	and	
aid	workers	have	offered	a	vital	lifeline	to	some	of	the	poorest	people	
in	need.	and	we	are	now	building	links	with	some	of	the	nations	most	
threatened	by	global	warming.
The	SNP’s	approach	to	international	relations	would	be	based	on	
principles	that	define	Scotland	as	a	nation:	compassion,	fairness	
and	humanity	–	and	as	such	the	SNP	will	always	uphold	the	rule	of	
international	law.	We	believe	these	principles	should	also	define	the	
UK’s	approach	overseas.	The	actions	of	Tony	Blair	and	Gordon	Brown	in	
taking	us	into	the	illegal	war	in	Iraq	exemplify	why	we	need	this	new	
approach	–	we	can’t	allow	the	mistakes	that	were	made	over	Iraq	to	
happen	again.

PaGe	19

Building a new partnership

The	SNP	believes	that	Scotland	should	join	with	the	world	community	
where	necessary	to	preserve	peace	and	security.	We	propose	a	Scottish	
Centre	for	Reconciliation	and	Conflict	Resolution,	to	promote	peaceful	
alternatives	to	armed	conflict.
Options	for	Scotland’s	defence	with	independence	are	set	out	in	the	
Scottish	Government’s	White	Paper	Your	Scotland,	Your	Voice.	and	over	
the	next	few	years,	within	the	UK,	it	is	important	to	have	Scotland’s	
voice	heard	on	these	issues.	
What	is	certain	is	that	whoever	wins	the	UK	General	election	there	will	
be	a	Strategic	Defence	Review	which	will	look	at	all	aspects	of	defence	
policy,	from	strategy	to	the	structure	of	the	armed	forces,	funding	
and	equipment.	an	important	part	of	any	review	is	to	incorporate	the	
key	and	undisputed	facts	about	current	defence	spending,	military	
capability	and	footprint,	including	here	in	Scotland,	and	to	reverse	a	
trend	that	has	seen	Scotland	losing	out	from	UK	defence	investment.	
It	makes	no	sense,	when	we	have	troops	engaged	overseas,	to	be	
threatening	further	cuts	in	bases,	procurement	or	training,	especially	
as	current	UK	plans	will	see	tens	of	billions	wasted	on	a	new	generation	
nuclear	deterrent.	We	are	committed	to	retain	all	Scotland’s	current	
bases	and	remain	committed	to	the	restoration	of	Scotland’s	historic	
infantry	regiments	which	were	amalgamated	in	2006.	
and	given	the	increasing	strains	on	service	family	life	we	believe	that	
Scottish	recruited	units	should	be	based	as	close	to	home	as	is	practical.
The	SNP	has	major	concerns	about	the	UK	government’s	approach	to	
the	current	conflict	in	afghanistan.	With	the	death	toll	rising	we	have	
questioned	why	our	soldiers	have	not	always	had	the	equipment	they	
need	and	why	there	has	not	been	a	clear	strategy	for	delivering	peace	or	
democracy.	Once	again	the	men	and	women	on	the	frontline	are	doing	us	
proud,	while	the	leaders	back	in	London	are	letting	our	soldiers	down.
The	SNP	does	not	wish	to	see	Scottish	troops	committed	without	time	
limit,	without	being	given	a	sense	of	their	overarching	goals,	without	a	
clear	vision	of	what	is	being	fought	for,	and	without	a	consideration	of	
the	means	that	will	be	necessary	to	achieve	such	an	end.	That	is	why	we	
must	now	have	a	proper	review	of	the	UK’s	strategy	and	approach.

PaGe	20

Manifesto 2010

We	have	a	moral	objection	to	nuclear	weapons	and	are	firm	in	our	belief	
that	when	the	UK	government	is	planning	cuts	in	important	budgets,	
they	should	not	be	wasting	£100	billion	on	buying	a	new	generation	of	
nuclear	bombs.	We	have	been	proud	to	stand	alongside	Scotland’s	faith	
groups,	the	STUC	and	community	campaigners	in	opposition	to	Trident	
and	its	replacement	and	we	will	continue	to	do	so.
The	nuclear	deterrent	has	employment	costs	as	well.	Research	
conducted	by	the	STUC	and	CND	actually	found	that	the	money	spent	
maintaining	the	UK’s	nuclear	deterrent	costs	Scotland	approximately	
3,000	jobs.	Faslane,	the	current	nuclear	submarine	base,	should	be	
the	base	for	conventional	naval	forces.	This	is	the	approach	adopted	
by	similar,	independent	nations.	Norway	for	example	supports	a	
conventional	naval	fleet	and	conventional	bases	–	with	more	people	
employed	as	civilians	or	service	personnel	than	the	current	position	in	
Scotland.
Having	full	responsibility	for	defence	matters	would	let	the	people	of	
Scotland	have	their	proper	say	on	these	issues	–	we	could	take	the	
decisions	on	adequate	protection	of	our	troops.	We	would	have	been	
free	to	decline	to	take	part	in	the	recent	Iraq	War,	based	on	its	lack	of	a	
legal	mandate.	and	we	would	be	in	a	position	to	ensure	the	removal	of	
nuclear	weapons	from	Scotland.

PaGe	21

Building a new partnership

Why Independence? Scotland is a distinct community. Together we see
ourselves as a nation and independence is the natural state for nations
like ours. And as a community, we care most about our own success –
we have the biggest stake in solving the problems we face, or making
the most of the opportunities available to us. As a community and as a
nation we are the best people for the job of making our nation the sort
of place we want it to be.
Independence is about updating the relationship between Scotland and
England. It is about creating a new partnership of equals – a social
union to replace the current political union. Scotland and England will
share the same Queen, the same currency and as members of the EU
there will be open borders, shared rights, free trade and extensive
co-operation. The big difference will be that instead of only deciding
some issues here in Scotland, independence will allow us to take
decisions on all the major issues. That is the reality of independence in
this interdependent world.
Independence runs like a golden thread through this manifesto
and underpins the policies that will have the biggest impact on our
prosperity and wellbeing. Instead of waiting for others to act, it would
allow us to take forward our ideas immediately and with greatest
benefit for the people of our nation.
The fundamental appeal of independence is that it offers a different
vision for our nation’s future. The Westminster parliament and system
is discredited and too often works against the interests of the people
of Scotland – the system is failing us and that is why we need a fresh
start and a new approach. So we can address our own problems with our
own efforts and make the most of the opportunities that exist in such
abundance for our nation.

PaGe	22

Supporting the Scottish Government

SNP MPs will be strong partners for the Scottish Government in
London. We need MPs who will support Scotland, not argue against
Scotland. MPs who will help win the best deal for our nation.
That	includes	opposing	the	Labour	and	Tory	cuts	agenda	that	poses	
such	a	threat	to	the	achievements	of	the	past	three	years	and	the	
many	projects	designed	to	make	Scotland	wealthier,	safer,	smarter	and	
healthier	in	the	future.
Since the Scottish election the SNP government has implemented almost
three quarters of our headline manifesto commitments.
These include:
• Freezing the Council Tax
• Introducing the Small Business Bonus
• Publishing a White Paper on Independence
• Abolishing tolls on the Forth and Tay Bridges
• Reversing the decision to downgrade the A&Es at Monklands and Ayr
hospitals
• Delivering 1,000 more police
• Abolishing the Graduate Endowment Fee
• Ensuring the business rates poundage does not rise above England
• Completing the M74
• Accelerating the electrification of the central Scotland rail network
• Meeting the 2 month target for cancer patients to be diagnosed and
treated
Much	has	been	achieved	and	as	we	move	forward,	much	to	protect:
Economic Recovery
The	SNP’s	economic	Recovery	Plan	has	already	supported	20,000	jobs	
and	left	Scottish	families	with	more	money	in	their	pockets	at	the	end	
of	each	month.	This	includes	the	extension	of	the	council	tax	freeze	for	
a	third	year,	with	the	resources	made	available	to	freeze	the	Council	Tax	
again	in	2010-11.	
From	april	2010,	as	a	result	of	Scottish	Government	actions,	Scottish	
business	will	enjoy	a	£220	million	competitive	advantage	over	
companies	elsewhere	in	the	UK	because	we	lowered	the	business	rate	
poundage.	This	is	£220	million	that	can	be	invested	in	growth	and	jobs.	
and	we	are	extending	the	small	business	bonus,	which	means	that	more	
businesses	in	local	communities	–	the	sorts	of	businesses	that	form	the	
life	blood	of	local	high	streets	–	will	pay	no	rates	at	all.		
PaGe	23

Supporting the Scottish Government

The	Scottish	Investment	Bank	also	has	a	big	part	to	play	as	Scotland	
moves	into	recovery	and	the	SNP	is	committed	to	directing	additional	
funds	to	support	business	growth	through	this	important	initiative.	
These	will	remain	a	key	part	of	our	economic	strategy.	We	will	be	
working	hard	to	protect	them	from	the	threatened	Labour	and	Tory	cuts.
We	have	learned	lessons	from	previous	recessions,	where	rising	longterm	unemployment	created	lasting	damage	to	Scotland’s	communities	
that	carried	across	generations.	We	are	determined	that	this	time	no	
community	will	be	left	behind.	In	Scotland	we	can	act	to	make	sure	
this	happens,	and	at	Westminster	effective	Scottish	MPs	are	needed	to	
ensure	the	London	government	plays	it’s	part	too.
Recovery	is	still	fragile	and	there	are	undoubtedly	still	job	losses	
and	economic	disappointments	to	come.	However,	even	in	these	tough	
economic	times,	jobs	are	being	created,	many	with	Scottish	Government	
support.	Sainsbury’s	has	announced	a	further	1,300	jobs	in	Scotland	by	
the	end	of	2010,	Scottish	and	Southern	energy	has	confirmed	250	new	
high	quality	jobs	and	safeguarded	a	further	70	at	the	£20	million	Centre	
of	engineering	excellence	in	Glasgow	and	Tesco	Bank	has	established	
their	headquarters	in	edinburgh	as	part	of	declared	plans	for	1,750	
Scottish	jobs.	and	in	the	past	month	Ceridian	has	announced	200	new	
jobs	in	Renfrewshire,	Total	and	Dong	500	in	the	Tormore	gas	field	off	
Shetland	and	Integrated	energy	Systems	International	400	in	their	
proposed	Biomass	plant	in	Inverurie.	The	enormous	potential	of	our	
energy	sector	has	been	confirmed	by	last	year’s	investment	by	Skykon	
in	a	new	tower	manufacturing	facility	in	Kintyre	and	this	month’s	£14	
million	investment	by	BiFab	to	secure	400	jobs	at	the	Fife	energy	Park.
We	are	directly	supporting	jobs	in	local	communities	through	record	
investment	in	social	housing,	including	the	first	substantial	investment	
in	council	housing	for	decades.	Our	new	initiative,	the	National	Housing	
Trust,	has	the	potential	to	provide	thousands	of	new	affordable	homes	
to	rent.	
Connecting	Scotland	is	also	an	important	part	of	our	approach	to	
economic	growth.	The	new	Borders	Railway	will	provide	direct	access	
for	many	communities	to	edinburgh,	boosting	local	jobs	and	local	
economies.	Similarly,	the	faster	journey	times	by	train	from	aberdeen	
and	Inverness,	the	improvements	on	the	a9	and	a96	and	the	green	light	
for	the	aberdeen	by-pass	will	also	deliver	social	and	economic	benefits	

PaGe	24

Manifesto 2010

for	communities	in	the	north	and	north	east.	and	we	will	take	forward	
the	crucial	Forth	Replacement	Crossing,	in	the	face	of	the	cuts	proposed	
by	the	government	in	London.
Education and Skills
Our	economic	Recovery	plan	is	also	supporting	thousands	of	new	
training	places,	including	20,000	apprenticeships	this	past	year,	
exceeding	our	target	by	well	over	1,000.	and	through	the	Scottish	
budget	this	year,	we	have	invested	once	again	in	modern	apprentices	
and	in	our	universities	and	colleges.	
In	the	year	ahead,	Scottish	students	will	get	new	financial	support,	with	
a	£30	million	package	to	increase	their	income	through	grants	and	loans.	
The	SNP	will	not	introduce	tuition	fees	or	top	up	fees	and	will	oppose	
any	changes	in	english	fees	arrangements	that	have	the	knock	on	effect	
of	reducing	funding	for	Scotland	through	the	Barnett	formula,	as	we	
have	done	previously.
and	we	are	strengthening	education	for	young	people	through	the	16+	
Learning	Choices	to	offer	a	place	of	learning	to	every	young	person	as	
they	reach	the	end	of	their	compulsory	school	years.	These	initiatives	
are	a	crucial	part	of	recovery,	because	it	is	only	through	a	highly	
educated	and	skilled	population	that	Scotland	will	truly	flourish	in	the	
future.	
and	we	are	also	working	to	improve	the	life	chances	of	young	Scots,	
with	an	increase	in	the	number	of	free	hours	of	nursery	education.	
Class	sizes	in	primary	schools	are	at	a	record	low	and	we	are	working	
with	local	government	to	make	more	progress	to	deliver	our	pledge	
of	class	sizes	of	18	or	less	in	P1	to	P3.	These	are	exactly	the	sort	of	
important	public	services	that	our	MPs	will	work	to	protect	by	offering	
an	alternative	to	the	London	parties’	agenda	of	cuts.
and	we	will	protect	our	planned	£1.25	billion	investment	in	even	more	
new	and	refurbished	schools	in	the	years	ahead	as	we	work	to	remove	
the	backlog	of	repair	and	rebuilding	that	has	grown	up	over	the	past	
decade.	Since	taking	office,	we	have	built	or	substantially	refurbished	
schools	at	a	faster	rate	than	before	-	260	schools	across	Scotland	with	
over	half	financed	using	traditional	borrowing	or	NPD.	

PaGe	25

Supporting the Scottish Government

Innovation and the industries of the future
We	are	also	investing	in	innovation	and	the	industries	of	the	future.	
We	have	launched	the	£10	million	Saltire	Prize	to	provide	the	largest	
innovation	prize	for	marine	renewables,	and	established	a	new	£12	
million	fund	for	research	and	development	putting	Scotland	at	the	
forefront	of	this	emerging	and	potentially	planet	saving	technology.		
The	Saltire	Prize	has	already	seen	146	expressions	of	interest	from	
27	different	countries,	and	we	are	proud	to	be	working	with	experts	
from	around	the	world	and	with	National	Geographic,	one	of	the	largest	
scientific	and	educational	institutions	in	the	world,	to	promote	and	
develop	this	initiative.
Since	May	2007	Scottish	Ministers	have	consented	29	renewable	and	1	
non-renewable	application	under	section	36	of	the	energy	act	–	over	2	
GW	of	consented	capacity.	We	are	approving	projects	more	quickly	than	
ever	before	–	averaging	10	a	year	compared	to	just	4	in	the	final	year	of	
the	previous	administration.
Plans	to	harness	over	11	GW	of	offshore	wind	capacity	by	2020	could	
deliver	up	to	20,000	jobs	across	the	supply	chain,	and	over	£30	billion	
investment	in	Scotland’s	economy.	and	the	recent	announcement	of	10	
project	agreements	under	the	Pentland	Firth	and	Orkney	Waters	leasing	
round	with	Crown	estate	will	generate	1.2	GW	of	wave	and	tidal	marine	
energy	off	Scotland’s	north	coast,	as	well	as	the	potential	to	create	
2,600	jobs	and	investment	of	up	to	£4	billion	by	2020.	Our	nation	has	no	
less	than	25%	of	europe’s	offshore	renewable	resource.
Scotland’s	marine	environment	is	undoubtedly	one	of	our	most	prized	
assets	and	alongside	incentives	for	new	oil	recovery	we	believe	the	
offshore	taxation	regime	should	also	support	the	development	of	Carbon	
Capture	and	Storage.	Our	vision	is	for	Scotland	to	be	an	integral	part	of	
a	North	Sea	CO2	storage	hub	–	delivering	the	transportation	links	and	
storage	sites	and	benefiting	from	the	potentially	multi-billion	pound	
investment	in	research.
Scotland	has	the	know-how	and	the	geography	to	be	a	world	leader	in	
this	-	and	other	-	offshore	energy	technologies	and	it	is	an	opportunity	
we	must	take	full	advantage	of	in	the	decade	to	come.	Investment	today	
will	deliver	greater	returns	–	in	jobs	and	revenues	–	tomorrow.	and	it	
is	clear,	given	this	huge	opportunity	and	potential	to	generate	up	to	10	
times	Scotland’s	own	electricity	requirements	there	is	no	need	for	new	
nuclear	power	stations.
PaGe	26

Manifesto 2010

Supporting the rural economy
Scotland	has	huge	strengths	and	enormous	potential	and	that	must	be	
translated	into	greater	prosperity	and	opportunity	for	hard-working	
families	and	individuals	in	communities	across	our	nation.	
In	the	months	ahead	we	will	be	taking	forward	the	£1.5	billion	rural	
development	programme	investment,	with	millions	more	invested	in	
rural	businesses	and	local	economies	across	Scotland.	Initiatives	such	
as	the	Pack	Inquiry	are	designed	to	maximise	the	impact	of	government	
support	in	our	farming	community	and	we	will	work	with	the	industry	to	
deliver	a	package	that	bests	suits	Scotland’s	needs.	
Fishing	contributes	hundreds	of	millions	to	our	economy	every	year	and	
provides	tens	of	thousands	of	jobs.	The	Common	Fisheries	Policy	(CFP)	
forces	fishermen	to	throw	away	about	half	the	whitefish	caught	at	a	
cost	of	some	£60m.	These	discards	are	at	the	heart	of	the	CFP’s	failure.	
They	represent	a	moral	and	environmental	obscenity	and	stopping	
these	discards	is	one	of	the	keys	to	securing	a	more	prosperous	and	
sustainable	future	for	Scots	fishermen.
The	Scottish	Government	is	working	with	the	fishing	industry	and	
environmental	groups	to	take	forward	measure	such	as	CCTV,	selective	
gear	and	real	time	closures	and	we	believe	this	is	the	way	forward	so	
our	fishermen	can	land	more	and	earn	more	without	the	damage	to	the	
stocks	that	discards	represent.
We	oppose	the	CFP	and	believe	it	should	be	replaced	so	that	there	is	a	
bigger	say	for	our	fishing	communities,	more	regional	management	and	
power	over	fisheries	returned	to	Scotland.	and	the	ongoing	review	gives	
us	the	opportunity	to	present	this	radical	case.
Clearly	Scotland’s	rural	communities	and	economy	have	specific	needs	
and	the	SNP	is	working	hard	for	rural	interests.	That	is	why	we	have	
introduced	road	equivalent	tariff	on	routes	to	the	Western	Isles,	and	
will	look	to	protect	this	important	initiative	from	the	proposed	Labour	
and	Tory	cuts.
A healthier Scotland
Spending	in	our	NHS	is	at	record	levels	and	it	is	to	protect	this	funding	
that	the	SNP	is	offering	an	alternative	to	the	planned	Labour	and	Tory	
cuts.	as	part	of	our	commitment	to	direct	more	to	the	frontline	and	
protect	the	things	that	are	most	important,	we	will	take	forward	vital	
PaGe	27

Supporting the Scottish Government

investment	including	our	£1	billion	programme	of	new	community	
health	facilities	through	the	Scottish	Futures	Trust	and	the	£840m	new	
Southern	General	hospital	in	Glasgow.
Our	new	Patients	Rights	Bill	will	introduce	new	health	rights	for	the	
people	of	Scotland	including	waiting	time	guarantees.	This	will	build	
on	a	record	that	has	already	seen	big	reductions	in	waiting	times.	The	
waiting	times	for	outpatient	appointments	and	for	inpatient/day	case	
treatment	are	each	down	to	a	maximum	of	12	weeks	and	we	intend	to	go	
further	-	by	next	year,	no	patient	will	wait	more	than	18	weeks	in	total	
from	being	referred	by	a	GP	to	receiving	the	treatment	they	need.	
We	have	also	reduced	waiting	times	for	cancer	treatment.	The	NHS	is	
now	working	towards	a	maximum	waiting	time	for	cancer	of	just	31	
days	from	when	the	decision	is	taken	to	treat	a	patient	to	the	treatment	
being	started.	We	have	also	taken	steps	to	improve	the	availability	of	
cancer	drugs.
We	have	trebled	spending	on	tackling	hospital	acquired	infections	
and	introduced	the	first	independent	inspection	regime	to	ensure	the	
highest	possible	standards	of	cleanliness	in	our	hospitals.	This	is	a	
key	priority	for	the	SNP	in	government	and	we	will	work	to	build	on	the	
recent	welcome	reductions	in	infections.
and	we	will	move	forward	with	our	proposals	to	abolish	prescription	
charges	in	2011,	as	promised	in	2007.	We	believe	prescription	charges	
are	a	tax	on	ill	health	and	we	are	proud	to	stand	for	what	is	an	essential	
principle	of	a	health	service	free	at	the	point	of	need.	We	will	not	let	the	
London	parties	and	their	cuts	undermine	Scotland’s	NHS.
We	are	also	taking	action	to	improve	health,	prevent	ill-health	and	
tackle	health	inequalities.	We	are	acting	to	tackle	obesity	and	promote	
physical	activity.	We	are	also	acting	to	tackle	the	health	impact	of	
tobacco,	with	legislation	to	restrict	cigarette	displays	and	remove	
vending	machines.	and	we	are	investing	more	than	ever	in	rehabilitation	
so	that	drug	addicts	can	kick	the	habit.	
Safer Communities
When	the	SNP	came	to	office	in	2007	many	of	Scotland’s	streets	were	not	
safe.	So	we	have	been	working	hard	to	make	them	safer.	
We	are	taking	forward	proposals	to	tackle	alcohol	misuse	including	a	
policy	of	minimum	pricing	that	is	targeted	on	the	cheap	alcohol	that	
PaGe	28

Manifesto 2010

fuels	so	much	of	the	anti-social	behaviour	and	violence	on	our	streets.	
There	is	growing	support,	not	only	among	health	professionals	and	
the	police,	but	now	also	among	the	drinks	industry	including	leading	
manufacturers	and	the	licensed	trade.
and	we	are	delivering	additional	policing	capacity	-	more	police	officers,	
spending	more	time	in	our	communities	and	on	the	beat.	Currently,	the	
number	of	police	officers	in	Scotland	is	at	17,273	–	1,039	higher	than	
when	we	came	to	office	and	more	than	the	1,000	extra	we	promised.	Our	
MPs	will	do	all	they	can	to	protect	the	funding	for	these	officers	who	are	
making	Scotland’s	streets	safer.	
and	they	will	be	working	to	protect	investment	in	initiatives	like	the	
highly	effective	Violence	Reduction	Unit.	Under	the	SNP	more	knife	
carriers	are	being	sent	to	jail	and	they	are	getting	longer	sentences.		
The	average	sentence	for	those	sent	to	prison	for	carrying	a	knife	has	
now	increased	from	less	than	4	months	in	2003/04	to	well	over	8	months	
in	2008/09.
Scotland can be more successful
These	are	the	sorts	of	initiatives	–	across	the	range	of	policy	portfolios	
–	that	are	important	for	the	SNP	and	we	believe	for	Scotland’s	
communities.	They	are	designed	to	make	Scotland	the	more	successful	
country	we	know	it	can	be.
They	are	initiatives	we	will	continue	to	work	hard	to	protect	and	deliver.	
at	this	election	the	people	of	Scotland	are	being	asked	to	put	their	
cross,	not	only	beside	a	candidate,	but	beside	a	future.	That	is	why,	in	
this	manifesto,	we	have	set	out	a	new	vision	for	Scotland.	Our	nation	
deserves	more	than	a	decade	of	dismal	cuts	-	a	decade	of	wasted	
opportunities	and	lost	hope.
We	can’t	let	the	London	parties	make	the	wrong	choices	at	the	expense	
of	Scottish	communities.	But	there	is	another	way.
On	polling	day	it	is	the	people,	not	the	politicians	who	have	the	power.	
and	the	people	can	give	real	power	to	Scotland.
This	time,	don’t	just	vote	for	a	politician,	elect	a	local	champion,	a	
national	champion	with	the	SNP.

PaGe	29

Manifesto 2010

available in audio CD,
Large Print, Braille and
easy Read formats.
Please call 0800 633
5432.
Textphone users call 0131 525
8938.

VOTE SNP
Polls open 7am-10pm
Thu 6 May

VISIT www.snp.org
DONATE £5 now,
text SNP to 85199
Call us on
0800 633 5432
3 Jackson’s Entry,
Edinburgh EH8 8PJ

Promoted by Peter Murrell on behalf of the Scottish National Party,
both at Gordon Lamb House, 3 Jackson’s Entry, Edinburgh EH8 8PJ.
Printed by City Print Services, 90 Bothwell Lane, Glasgow.

Page 31

Don’t just
vote for a
politician...

